
          
ihZ J·5j:d L;Cle
TIBone ·I!

"'
1 I
5

--=I=
iYR

THE
THIRD VOLUME

OF THE :

O F
m R. It 0mag OCZWII

CONTAININ G,
AMUSEMENTS Serious & Comical,

Calculated for the Meridian of London.

To which is added,
Ten L E TT E R S, on several Saljets.

Together with
His Pocket-book of Common Places. His Diverting Letters, Billlt-deux,
His Walk round London and We- l both Originalsand Translations,

to Gentlemen and Ladies.
minster, pleasantly expoing the to Gt andLaes.
VicesandFollies of feveralparts His Voyage on the Thames; or,
of the Town. the KWater-Dialec.
Letters translated from AEneas Syl- Pocns, Translations, Lampoons, and

viues, Poet-Laureat to the Empe- Satyrs on several Occasions, in
ror, who was after that created Latin and Englilh.
Pope, LPius II.] with his Satyr
on Women of the Town. A Continuation of the Quaker's
A Declamation in-Defence of Ga- Sermon.

min", &c. against Drunkenness. HisLondon andLacedemc-ian Ot-
The Dilpenfary; or, The Qacks: cles, resolving many Nice and

a Farce,wrote in theYear 697. Curious Questions.

LONDO N,
Printed for S. B. and Sold by B. Bragg, at the Raven in

Pater-nofter-Row. i 7 o 8. .
_ _ _ _
_i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

)Jr~m&Z IQLQ7WLan B4ar~net-·

Tr -r7iZ s Va,

:i ·-'L

THE
BOOK SELLER

TO THE
READER.

H E Great Success the Twvo lVolumes
of Mr. Broln's Works, already prin-
ted, have met with from the Pub-
lick, has encourag'd me to commit
this Third Volume to the Press. The Town has
shew'd an Earnest Dliere for his Works; and
the frequent Demands that have been made
on this account, have induc'd me to publish
the ensuing Pieces. The Amufenoents, which
contain part of this Volume, have been prin-
ted three several times in a few Years, and now
are become so scarce, that a fourth Impression
is universally defir'd. The Residue of his
Works, which at this time fee the Light,
were with great Difficulty obtain'd by me,
from Mr. Brown's near Relations, and some
Gentlemen, who set a great and a just Value
on his Producions: They contain the Letters
of Aeneas Syvimw, Poet-Laureat to the Empe-
rour, a Person who afterwards enjoy'd the

A z Su:
P

-II-

Supreme Dignity of the Popedom, and was
himself as Eminent for his Wit and rood Sense
as for the high Preferments he enjov'd.

'Tis very observable, that all Mr. Brown's
Translations were chosen with great Judg-
ment; he had a particular Talent in pitching
upon the beS of Authors, and they never ap-
pear'd, when Originals, so beautiful or enga-
ging as in the Dress he cloath'd 'em. His
Learning was Universal, and his Wit agree-
able to the Humors of all Polite Nations, as well
as his own. His London and Lacedermoniain
Mercuries gives us Undeniable Instances of his
acquir'd Parts and Judgment, by his farisfying
such Questions as were propos'd to him with
a furprizing Resolution. Nor is the Turn of
his Fancy less conspicuous in his Walk round
London: His Remarks on that Subjec are not
only entertaining, but injructcive and had he
liv'd to have given the Ldt Hand to this and
other Pieces, 'tis reasonable to believe (as some
discerning Judges have affirm'd) he would
not only have equal'd the llModerns, but came
up to the Spirit and Elegancy of the An-
cientr.

THE

THE
CONTENTS

OF THE

OF
Mr. B R 0 W N's Works.

AM U S E ME N.T S.
T HE Preface Page I
J The Voyage of the World p. 4
The Court p. 8
London p. 14
The Playhofe p. 40
Wefjmlinfer--Iall p. 46
The Walks p. 51
Gallantry P' 59
Marriage p. 60
Gaming-houfes p. 68
The Fragments of an Indian Letter p. 69
Coffee-houses P. 76

.' 7.
I_ _ _

A Herauld's Office p. 84
The City Circle p. 86
The City Lady's Mifiting-day ibid.
The Philosophical or Vertuofi Country p. 00oo
Phyjick p. o02
Letters Serious and Comical, p. 108 to p. 13 o
A Declamation in Defence of W- and Gam-

ing againfl Drnmkennefs p. 3 I
The Coiitinuatio. i of the OQteaer's Sermon p. i 5
Pleaf;zt Letters to G.I-tlcme;n ; imitated out of

Mionfieur de Pays. p. i
A Panefvrick fpon Cardie.al deRechelieu,iiz a

Letter of Mon ieur de Voiture p. I9
Diverting Billets to Ladies, out of Mofi de Pays,

p.27
A Letter of .neas Sylvius, who was afterwards

Pope Pius II. to his Father, about a Bastard Son,
whoml hefeint to him p. 52
A Saotr on the P1Womien of the Town p. 57
Letters to Gentlemen and Ladies p. 90
Ir. T. Brown's Pocket-book of Common Places

p. 28
A Walk round London and Westminster, expo-

ting the i/ices and Folies of the Tow ' p.
ATavern ibid,
Docor's Commons p. 10
The Presbyteri:m Meellti-houfe p. 12
mTc O Q.zker's 3eeti:7 p. i

The

The Bawdy-house p. 24
'Vpon Old Man's and Young Man's Coffee-hou

fes, p. 29
St. James's Park p. 41
4eJftminjfer-Abbey P. 45
v pon the two Compters p. 50
The Thames P.57
The Dispensary, a Farce, written in the Tear 1697

p. 66,
P O E M S on several Occasions.
A PaJloral on the Death of Queen Mary p. 9g
An Epitaph on Mr. Robert Bound, of Chelmes-

ford in Effex, p. 94
Prologue to a Mufick-Speech had in the Theatre in

Oxford ibid.
The Epilogue p. 96
An Epitaph on the Daughter of Mr. Robert Lym-

pany, p.97
To the Lord Chancellor in I686 p. 98
Vpon Mr. Creeche's Translation of Lucretius,

p. I00
A Catch, by Mr. T. Brown p. o I
A Paraphrase of Horace ibid.
A Panegyrick upon Coll. Geo. Walker p. i oj
To Mr. D , upon his incolmparable Ballads,

call'd bj him Lyric Odes p. 104
'pon Friendship ibid.
On a Token sent by a Lady p. 10
On Flowers in a Lady's Bosom p. Io6
Vpon the Vintners adulterating Claret p. I07
The London Vintners Anfier to Mr. Brown,

p. o08

A

A Panegyrick for Mr. Will. Fuller, &c. ibid.
A Lent-Entertainment; or, !a Merry Interview by

Moon-light, between the Ghost of Mxvius and
the City Bard, p. 110
On TWomans Levity p. 14
Algernoon Sidney's Letter of Advice to his Friend

concerning the Educ.tion of his Son p. 118
On Dr. Sherlock p. 120
On the Oxford Almanackfor the Tear 1702 ibid.
On Dr. Garth's Sickness, I703 p. 12I
The London and Lacedamonian Oracles, refolv-

ing many nice and curi Queflions p. 122
J47.t Na7tion invented Painting p. 13 I
Whether there is such a thing (u the Philo opher's

Stone p. 133
The Reason why a Chequer is placed at Ale-hot Jes,

p. I40
The Antiquity of Dancing p. 14I
The Swvlice t; i;fti ituted, by whom p. 147
The Antirqity of fieyin Grace before Meat, p. 54
Whether Nutmegs cr Moral FHonelzy be mofl recon-

cileable with the Climate of Scotland p. 155
How the LacedxmonianspuniJb'd Adultery, ibid,

I. j
aatelm.S, .--
SERIOUS & COMICA L

Caiculated for the Meridiai of
LONDONd
^ .; '
--i

By Mr. Tlio'i Brorwn.
A M n s E Mi E N T I.
The P R E F A C E.
T ..
H E Title I have confer'd uipon ri'

Book, gives me Authority. to mnake
as long a Preface as I please ; for;a
long Preface is a true Amufmment.
However, I have ventur'd to put one hcre'
under the apprehension that it will be very nCl'
cefary. toward the underfiading of the Book
tho' the generality. of Readers are of opinion,
that aPreface, iniead of setting off the Work,
eoes but expose the Vanity of the iAuthor.

A good General of an Army is less embnfl)afad
at the head of his Troops, than an iii Writer i!i-

:B1 tL'.
/ 1 -

the Front of his Produ&ions. He knows not in
what figure to dress his Countenance: If he
puts on a fierce and haughty Look, his Readers
think thcmfelves oblig'd to lower his Topsail,
and bring him under their Sterns: If he affees
an humble sneaking Posture, they flight and de-
fpife him: If he boasts the Excellency of his
Subje&, they believe not a Syllable of what he
savs: If he tells 'em there is little or nothing in
it, they take him at his Word ; and to fay no-
thi-ng at all of his Work, is an unfufferable Impo-
stion upon an Author.

I know not whatSuccefs these Papers will find
in the World but if any amuse themselves in
criticising upon'em, or reading 'em, my Design
is anfwer'd.

I have given the followingThoughts the name
or'Amufricts; you will find 'em Serious or Co-
mical, according to the Humour I was in when I
wrote 'em; and they will either divert, inftrul,
or tire yoG, after the Humour you are in when
you read 'e.-.

T'other day one of the imaginary serious
Wits, who thought it a weakness in any Man to
laugh, feeing a Copy of this Book, at the open-
ing of it, fell into a Paflion, and wrinkling up
his Nostrils like a heated Stallion that had a Mare
in the Wind, laid, The Book nrs unworthy of the
T7tle, for grave Sutbje3Ss fiJuld be treated with De-
corum;, and 'trd s to profane Serious Matters, to blind
'e; with Comical Entertainments. /What a Mixture
is here, fays he !

This Variety of Colours, -said I to my Cenfu-
rer, appears very natural to me for if one
frricly examines all Mens A&ions and Difcour-
fcs, wce ial find that Seriousness and Merriment
a:e near Neighbours, and always live together
i ke Friends. if fu llen mloody Sots don't set 'em

at

at Variance. Every Day Ihews us, that Serious
Maxims and Sober Counsels often proceed out of
the Mouths of the pleafanteft Companions, and
fich as asset to be always grave and muting, are
then more comical than they think themselves.

My Spark pulh'd his Remonstrance further:
Arc notyou ajZam'd, continued he, to print Amiufe-
ments? Don't you know, that Man w'as made for
Business, and not to fit amuing himself like an Orwl
in an Ivy-bufi ? To which I anfwer'd after this
manner:

The whole Life of Man is but one entire A-
mufement: Virtue only deserves the .Iame of
Business, and none but they that pratife it can
be truly said to be employ'd, for all the World
betide are idle.

One amuses himself by Ambition, another by
Interest, and another by that foolish Paflion Love.
Little Folks amuse themselves in Pleasures, great
Men in the acquisition of Glory, and I am amul
fed to think that all this is nothing but Amusement.

Once more, the whole Tranfasions of our
Lives are but meer Amusements, and Life it self
is but an Amusement in a continued expe&ation
of Death.

Thus much for Serious Matters; let us now
make haste to Pleasantry.

I have a great mind to be in Print; but above
all, I would fain be an Original, and that is a
true ComicalThought: When all the learned
Men in the World are but Translators, is it not
a pleasant Jest that you ihould strive to be an O-
riginal ! You should have obferv'd your Time,
and have come into the World with the ancient
Greeks for that purpose; for the Latines them-
selves are but Copies.

This Discourse has mightily difcourag'd me.
Is it true then, that there is such an Embargo

9B 2 laid

iaid upon Invention, that no Man can product
any thing that is perfectly new, and entirely his
awn ? Mlany Authors, I confers, have fold me so:
I will enquire further about it, and if Sir Roger,
Mr. Dryden, and Mr. D'Vrfey confirm it, then I
will believe it.

What need all this Toil and Clutter about 0-
riginal Authors and Translators ? He who Ima-
gines briskly, Thinks justly, and Writes corred-
ly, is an Original in the fame things that another
had thought before him. The Natural Air and
Curious Turn he gives hisTranflation, and the
Application wherewith he graces'em, is enough
to perfwade any Sensible Maln, that he was able to
think and perform the fame things, if they had
niot been thought and done before him, which is
an Advaw:tage owing to their Birth, rather than
to the Excellency of their Parts beyond their
Succeflors.

Some cfour Modern Writers, that have built
upon the Fcindatioo of the Ancients, have far ex-
cel'd in disguising their Notions, and improving
the first' Eflays, that they have acquir'd more
Glory and Reputation than ever was given to
the Origin.Al Authors: Nay, have utterly elfced
their Memories.

Thole who rob the Mlodern Writers study to
hide their Thefts; those who filch from the An-
cients, account it their Glory. But why the lafi
fnould be more reproach'd than the former, I
can't imagine, fnce thercis more Wit in diigui-
sing a Thought of Mr. Lock's, than in a lucky
rasfiation of a Pafage from Horace. After all,
it niuft be granted, that the G'eniz of tome Men
can never be brought to Write corre&ly in this
Age, till they have form'd their Judgments from
tle Standard ofthe Ancients, and the Delicacy of
trcir E`-prefiion from the Variety and Turns of

thli

the Moderns; and I know no reason why it should
be their Difparagement,to capacitate thenlfel es
by these Helps to serve the Publick.

Nothing will please some Men but Books fluft
with An.tiquity,, groaning under the weight of
Learned Quotations drawn from the Fountains:
And what is all this but Pilfering? But I will nei-
ther rob the Ancient nor Modern Books, but pil-
lage all I give you from the Book of the World.

The Book of theWorld is very ancient, and yet
always new. In all times Men and their Paflions
have been the Subjects: These Paflions were al-
ways the fame, tho' they have been delivered to
Posterity in differcnt manners, according to the
different Constitution of Ages; and in all Ages
they are read by every one according to the Cha-
ra&ers of their Wit, and the Extent of their
Judgment.

Those who are qualified to read and under-
stand the Book ofthe World, may be beneficial
to the Publick, in communicating the Fruit of
their Studies; but those that have no other
knowledg of the World'but what they collect
from Books, are not fit to give Inftrztiians, to
others.

If the World then is a Book that ought to be
read in the Original, one may as well colmpare it
to a Country that one cannot know, nor make
known to others, without travelling thro' it
hiinmfelf. I began this Journey very young ; I al-
ways lov'd to make Reflecions upon every tlhing
that presented it self to my view: I was amused
in making these Refleions: I have amused my
self in Writing them ;-and I wish my Reader
may amuse himself in Reading them.

Some will think it another Amufcmenut to find
a Book without a Dedication, especially from the
siand which this comnes from: For my part, I

B 3. givt

give 'em leave to make what Refleeions they
please, but I can aflure 'em this Omission of mine
did not happen so much from a Scarcity of Pane-
gyrick, as the want of a Patron; for I can flatter
as well as I could twenty Years since, and still re-
tain the knack of dignifying and diftinguibinwg
such as do not deserve it.

But as the Devil would have it, my L- such a
one has been laugh'd into Sence, and has order'd
his Porter to fay he is not at home to a Poetical
Visitant; the D-- of-- loves to be call'd
a Hero no where but in the Frontispiece of a
Play; and the M - of -- civily returns his
Thanks to the Gentlemanfor his Present, but without
one piece of Gold to enable him to live up to the
Title he compliments him with. The Lady -
loses such Sums at Cards, and her good-natur'd
Husband is under such apprehension of being
ruffled by the P-, and taken a Peg lower,
that Elegies, I am afraid, murt henceforth supply
the place of Dedications, and Men of my Profef-
sion will be more employ'd in writing on the
Heaths of the Muses, than making gross Com-
ments on the Lives of those who did not think
'em worth living.

However, I am one of the first of the Subur-
bian Class that has ventur'd out with an Amuse-
ment of this bulk, without making application
to a Nobleman's Porter, and tiring him out with
ihewing him his Master's Name. Which Confi-
deration I comfort my self at no small rate with,
and if I have sent into the World what may di-
vert the Pleasant, please the Serious, and in-
strut those that are willing to be advis'd, it's
beyond my expe&ance, and consequently mult
be an Amufemenr to my self as well as others.

AMulSE-.

7
AMUSEMENT II.
The Voydge of the W1orld.
Here is no Amusement so entertaining and
advantageous as improving some of our
leifure-time in Travelling, and giving a loose to
our Souls that have been upon the itretch, by di-
verting 'em with agreeable Refledions on' the
Manners of the different Countries we journey
thro', and the Constitutions of the several People,
the Places we visit, are furnifh'd with. If any
Man therefore has an Inclination to divert him-
self, and fail with me round the Globe, to super-
vise almost all the Conditions of humane Life,
without being infe&ed with theVanities and Vi-
ces that attend such a whimsical Perambulation,
let him follow me, who am going to relate it in
a Stile and Language proper to the variety of the
Subjedt: For, as the Caprichio came naturally in-
to my Pericranium, and I am as fond of what is*
the product of my Fancy, as a young Woman of
the Fruits of her loft Virginity, I am refolv'd to
purfueit thro'thick .and thin, .in order to en-
large my Capacity for a Man of Business.

Where then llall I begin? In the Name of
Mischief, what Country will first present it seif
to my Imagination ? He Bien! I have hit upoirt
already: Let's fleer for the Court, for that's the
Region whose Inhabitants will read us the befc
Ledure of true Knowledg, and give the most
inftruaive Ideas that the Profpec of the whole
World can possibly Amuse us with.

B4
----- -- --- -1--·14

'rbhe

The C O V R 7. .
'T HE CG-t is a fort of a Ta 7', an Epitome of

. what is Universal, and abounds with all
the Variety of'Aimuements that humane Occur-
rences can lpre1ent us with, or the Mind of Man
is capable of receiving. The Air they breath
rilere, is very fine and subtile; only for about
three parts and a half of four in the Year 'tis lia-
bi'e to be in'ecded with gross Vapours full of Flat-
tfey and Lying. All the Avenues leading to it are
:gi, fr-iing, agreeable to the Sight, and all end
in one ancd se fame poilt,rHonour andSelf-intereft.
icere rFr-r!'n keeps her Residence, and seems to
'sxpc' that we make our Addreftes. to her, at the
.ito.O of.a 1ong Walk, which lies open to all
Co:;ers and Goers. 'One wouldbe apt to think
:; :tir: igih:, thai he might reach the End on't
l.l,):-e i-e could count Twenty; but there are so
mi.ny U:.--vaiks and Alleys to cross, so many tur-
.ii.ig; a:i: ; indings to find out, that he is soon
(on^vinc'd cf his Mliftake. 'Tis contriv'd into
fich an intricate Maze, and obscure manner,
that t!e frraitefr way is not always the nearest;
a nd i iret Pra-tices and Measures are oft-times
very citeual Helps- to bring you to your Jour-
ncvs end, and forward your Designs to reach it.
Ih looks gloriously at a distance, but. when yoii
ap;,roach iiC, its Beauty diminishes.

- .rc all the Enquiry I have mrade alout it, I
am r:-t ac:ie to fitiseic your Curiosity, whether
tr.: G:-'id i. !' i'rauds upon be firm and solid. A
D:,, -;ori can ns icon out the controverted Ar-
rtYl '.'_' c;<,' :!: i. .:in, or an Enl;Jfij Qiaker.pr oYe
r,-. ':'' "::V i;o his.V'ifes lying on her Back, as
':i.e i:Lo: ltcJ.i::s;t p?-r,,?s in Afiirs, that are so-
teig to the Ilow\ledg of it, can diicover the

Ar-

.4rcata's of it at first fight. I have. seen £ome
Nlew-comers tread as confidently upon it, as if
they had been born there; but quickly found
they were in a new World, where the tottering
Earth made 'em giddy and stumble: For tho'
they knew Good and Evil were equally useful to
their Advancement, yet were so confounded to
know which of the two they ought to employ to
make their Fortunes with, that for want of Un-
derftanding only that pretty knack, they made
a Journey to Court only to go back again, and
report at Home they had the Honour of feeing
it. On the other fide, I have seen some old Sta-
gers walk upon Court-ground as gingerly as up-
on Ice or a Quagmire, and with all the Precau-
tion and Fear imaginable, left they fllould fall
from a great Fortune by the fame Defecs that
rais'd 'em; and not without caufe,for the Ground
is hard in some places, and finks in others; but
all People covet to get upon the highest spot, to
which there is no coming but by one Pafage, and
that is so narrow, that no Ambitious Pretender
can keep the way, without juftling other People
down with his Elbows: And the further mif-
chiefon't is, that those that keep their Feet will
not help up those that are fallen, but make use of
the fame Methods as are in pratice amongst a
pertain Community of Birds, ( Heavens forbid
I hlould fay Canary) that expel the Lame and
Wounded from their Society, and are no manner
of Company for those that are helpless, while
they are still clapping their Wings in defence of
those who have no occasion for it, and permit
every Privilege to thofe'of their feather'd Ac-
quaintance who have the least need of Afiftance.

Stout ljould hi. Heart, and thoughtful be his Head,
That rould injfippery Paths with Judgmeit wead,

nd

And tempt the Dangers which on Courts attend,
A smiling En'my, and a treach'rotu Friend,
As he of great Preferments waits the Call,
Certain to flip, and almoftfure to fall.

The Difficulties we meet with in this Country
are very furprizing; for he takes the longest
way about that keeps the old Tra& of Honesty
and true Merit for where the Address of some
does not help to make the Fortune of others, im-
mediately to eclipse his Desert, Calumny raises
the thickest Clouds, Envy the blackest Vapours,
and the Candidate is loft in the Fog of Competi-
tors, and must hide himself behind a Favourite's
Recommendation, if ever he hopes to obtain
what he seeks for: So that Virtue is no longer
Virtue, nor Vice Vice, but every thing is con-
founded and eaten up by particular Interests.

A profefs'd Courtier, tho' he never aims at
the Peace of God, is past any Man's understanding,
and if he does Good, it may be wholly attributed
to Chance; if Evil, you have no reason to impute
it to any thing but Design. He that holds him
by the hand, is in the fame condition with him
that has a wet Eel by the Tail, you no sooner
think you are lure of him, but you have loft him,
and he flips thro' your Fingers with the fame
swiftness as he difmifles you from his Memory,
after a thousand Promifesof neverforgettingyou.

If Familiarity breeds Contempt, he ought to be
the molt despicable Creature living, for My dear
Friend is the first Title you go by, tho' he never
saw you before that minute, and the next timeyou
visit me, Ijhall have nothing to do but to give you J5oy
of the pofefton of what you are new asking me for, is
the Diale& you understand him by, when if you
understood him as you ought, you would never
lose your time in making Addrefies to him.

Would

Would you know what Religion he is of, you
must enquire of his Prince, for he is the fittest
Person to resolve the Question, provided he can
give an account of his own: But have you a desire
to be inform'd what Good he has done for his
Country ? To deal ingenuously with you, follow
my Advice, and ask no body, for no man living
can tell you. Other Mens Sins flare 'em in their
Faces, but these Gentlemens Guilt rides behind
'em, and may be diftinguifi'd by the multitude
of their Liveries. If you offer to present one of
'em, He muzf be excs'd, he dare not accept of it, it's
Bribery, &c. But his Man calls you aside, tells
you the Business ihall be done, gives the Law a
milder Interpretation, and telling over the Gui-
nea's, has a round Sum of his Master for tis
pains, and is sent out of the way, to prevent the
detetion of filch unwarrantable Proceedings.

But tho' the Courtiers seem to tend one and all
to the fame Center, and Honour and.Intereft are
what theirWifhes and Endeavours termifiate in,
there are different Species among'em, as they
have rais'd themselves by different ways.

Observe that old ftarch'd Fop there; his Hat
and Peruque continue to have as little acquain-
tance together as they had in the Year 65. You
would take him for a Taylor by his Mein, but he
is another fort of an Animal I assure you, a Cour-
tier, a Politician, the most unintelligible thing now
in being. Ask him his Profeflion, and you'l puz-
zle him with the Enquiry, for he has run thro'
the whole Circle of Employments, and never
has been Master of one grain of Honesty since his
admiflion into either. franfubftantiation, Non-
refijtance, and Predestination have vice versa been
Articles of his Creed; and he is so well provi-
ded with Diftin&ions, that he can prove Inside-
lity to his Prince to be an Ad of Service to his

Coun-

Country, and that the only way.to preserve the
Protefirant Religion, is for such as he to abjure it.
Of all Trades that are neceflary to set up an An-
tiquated Beau, his Haberdiie;r loses the leat by
him, for he wears no Hat otherwise than under
his Arm, left his Brains ihould be overheated,
and his Head be rendrednot cool enough for him
to over-reach his Master with. In fliort, ie is
Divifibile in irfinitum,and you may as soon square
the Circle, as reduce the several Branches of the
matters of Fa&t he mar be charg'd with under
one single Head. Your puny unexperienc'd
Courtier fears every thing, but this Gentleman
is skilful in matters of Change, and so well re I
in the Vicissitudes of sublunary things, that he
disdains the Reproaches of the Subje&, and be-
ing wrapt up in the Protedion of his Prince,
seems apprehensive of nothing, till a Vote of Par-
liament flings him behind the Curtain and makes
him play afBo-peep with Politicks: at which
Diverflon we will leave him, to take a profpe&
of yonder gay thing, that basks himself in his
sovcraign's smiles, and has elbow'd out as good
a fan, and as well descended as himself, fron
lis Mailer's Intimacy. He wears much such ano-
ther habit on his Shoulders as he formerly car-
ried upon his Arm, and as an instance of his Con-
quests the last War in the Netherlands, has fix as
good Slanders Mares to his Coach as English Mo-
ney could purchase. Some are apt to blame him
tor making use of a Coat of Arms on it, and ma-
liciolfly try theirWits in making Enquiries how
much Money was paid the Herauld for the Pur-
chafe of it,. but I muff have more manners, lince
he's a Great Man, and there's no reason to fufpe&r
him for any other than a Wife One, for keeping
his ground where the generality of the fame Pro-
fcfion lofc theirs. ie has had as many Estates

. 3,

asany EnglifJ P.--- of 'em all, yet it is endued'
with that Fore-cast, as not to have a foot of
Land in a place where one day his Title may be
cail'd in question i and as for the Dirty Acres,
like Sir Yofeph in Mr. Congreve's Old Batchelor, he
has 1rafi'd his Hands of 'eim, but in another man-
ner, for he has sufficiently daub'd 'em with fin-
gering what he receiv'd in exchange for'em. ,In
ihort, his ManfIon-houfe is not in this World, i. e. il
the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland, tho'
his Abiding-place is; and there is such a great
Gulph between his PoflTeffons and ours, that a
Resumption Act has as little regard with him as
that against Immorality and Prophanenefs.

But as this Gentleman has work'd himself in-
to favour by his good Looks and Deportment,
so it will not be amiss to take a View of that fu-
perannuated Sinner there, who has had other
Qualifications to recommend him. * Let me tell
you, Sirs, it's a brave thing to be a G-l Offi--r,
without bearing the Fatigues of a Camp, and:
there's nothing like being paid for a Regiment
of Red Locztfs, without running the hazard of
bearing 'em company amongt the Desolations
of War and Famine. It's the happiest and nmof
contented Itate imaginable, to fee the refela-
blance of Battels without the danger of being
wounded in'em, and hear the Artillery rioar by
Day, without any apprehensions of being fright-
ned from flajing in the Pan at Night with one's
.l1iftrefs. As for my part, if it were ailow'd me
to chufe my condition of Life, I flould assuredly
pitch on such a one as this only if it was my
fortune to have his Bedfellow, I should desire to
be without his Age: And in this Wifli Madam
--- would not refuse to joyn with me, if Re-
port speaks true of her, as grey IHais fem to
icmonfl-rate in relation to him.

I could

I could pursue my Discourse in the Charater
of that B - that has a Pendulum on his Neck,
as if he mov'd by Mechanism, but, poor honest in-
defatigable Pains-taker, he has so mortified him-
self with Fafiing and Praying, that the T'ranfla.
tion-Bill may not pass, that it would be a piece of
Cruelty to triumph over his Imperfetions, tho'
the World is apt to censure him for taking ano,
ther Man's House over his Head, and bespeaking
the poffieion of it before the Tenant, for Life, is
dead. A multitude of Observations might also
be made on others that inhabit in this slippery
Tenement, but as the City is more Peopled than
the Court, and consequently must have a greater
number of Amusements, we muit reserve a grea-
ter space for Remarks on it, since there is Matter
enough to employ us, ihould we take up the
whole duration of Time, and bespeak Eternity
for a Life that is equal to it.

AMU SE ME NT III.

LONDON.
L Ondon is a World by it self; we daily disco-

ver in it more new Countries and furpri-
zingSingularities than in all the Universe be-
fides. There are among the Londoners so many
Nations differing in Manners, Customs, and Reli-
gions, that the Inhabitants themselves don't know
a quarter of.'em. Imagine then what an Indian
would think of such a motly Herd of People, and
What h diverting Amusement it would be to him
to examine with a Traveller's Eye all the remar-
kable things of this mighty City. AWhimfy
now takes me in the Head, to carry this Stran-
ger all over the Town with me: No doubt but

his

his odd and fantastical Idea's will furnilh me
with Variety, and perhaps with Diversion.

Thus I am refolv'd to take upon me the Geniu
of an Indian, who has had the Curiosity to travel
hither among us, and who had never seen any
thing like what he fees in London. We ihall fee
how he will be amaz'd at certain things, which
the prejudice of Custom makes to seem reafona-
ble and natural to us. f,'

To diverfifie the tile of my Narration, I will
sometimes make my Traveller speak, and some-
times I will take up the Discourse my self. I will
represent to my self the abftra&fed Ideas of an
Indian, and I will likewise represent ours to him.
In short, taking it for granted, that we two un-
derftand each other by half a word, I will set
both his and my Imagination on the ramble. Thofi
that won't take the pains to follow us, may tfay
where they are,and spare themselves the trouble
of reading further in. the Book; but they that
are minded to amuse themselves, ought to at-
tend the Caprice of the Author for a few mo-
ments.

I will therefore suppose this Indian of mine'
dropt perpendicularly from the Clouds, and
finds himself all on a sudden in the midst of this
prodigious and noisy City, where Repose and
Silence dare scarce shew their Heads in the dark-
eft Night. At firfi dash the confus'd Clamours
near Temple-bar Itun him, fright him, and make
him giddy.

He fees an infinite number of different Ma-
chines, all in violent motion, some riding on the
fop, some within, others behind, and Jehuin the
Coach-box, whirling some dignified Villain to-
wards the Devil, who has got an Estate by cheat-
ing the Publick. He lolls at full stretch within,
and half a dozen brawny Bulk-begotten Footmen
behind< In

In that dark Shop there, several Mysteries 6f
Iniquity have seen the L'ght, and it's a sign our
Saviour's Example is little regarded, since the
Money-changers are fuffer'd to live so near the
Temple. T'other fide of the Way dire&s you to
a House of a more fweet-finelling favour than
its Owner's Conscience, and you can no sooner
prepare your felfto make water near his back
Window, but you {hall have an obliging Female
look thro' her Fingers to take the dimensions of
the Pipe that emits it. Here stands a Shopkeeper
who has not Soul enough to wear a Beaver Hat,
with the Key of his Small Beer in his Pocket;
and not far from him a stingy Trader who has
no Small Beer to have a Key to. One fide of the
Way points you out a Bookseller turn'd Quack,
with his Elixirs and Gallopots ready to poyfon old
Galen, and the reft of his Wormeaten Men of
Phyfick's Works, which have taken no other Air
than what blows upon his Stall, since they un-
happily fell into his hands; and t'other dire&s
vou to a Divinity-monger, who, to the D--- of
St. P--'s immortal Credit, is ready to at-
teLt, that there is one living that has got Money
by him, and can prove any Man's Opinion to be
heterodox, and inconsistent with that of the
CGriftian Church, if he believes otherwise.

Some Carry, others are Carried: Make rway
there, fays a goity-leg'd Chairman, that is car-
rying a Punk of Quality to a Aorning's Exercise;
*or a Bartholomew-Baby Beau, newly launch'd out
of a Chocolate-houfe, with his Pockets as empty
as hisBrains. Miake roam there, fays another Fel-
low driving a Wheel-barrow of Nuts, that spoil
the Lungs of the City Prentices, and make them
wheeze over their Mistresses, as bad as the phleg-
matick Cuckolds their Masters do when call'd to
Fa;m;ly D:)tyj. One draws, another drives. Stand

*q

.p there you blind Pog,. fays a .Carman, Wil you
have the Cart fqueee your Gauts out ? . One Tinker-
knocks, another; bauls, Have you Brass Pot, Iron
Pot, :Kettle, Skillet,. or. a Prying-pan to. mend?
Whillf another Son of a Whore yelps louder thad
Hlmer's Stentor, Two agroat, and fourfar4fix-'enice
Mackerel. One draws his Mouth.up.to his Ears;
and howls out, Buy my Flounders, aid .is follow'd
by an old burly Drab, .that screams .bit the fali
of her Mades. and.her Soul. at the fame instant.

Here a foOty Chimney-fweeper takes the Wall
of a grave .Alderman,.ard a Broom-man justles the
Parson of the PgArih.. There a fat greafie Porter
runs a Trunk full-butt upon. you, while another
salutes your Antlers with a Flasket of Eggs and
Butter. Turn out thereyou Country Putt, fays aBul-
ly with a Sword two yards long jarring at his
heels, and throws him into the Kennel. By and
by comes a Chriftning, with the Reader screwing
up his Mouth to deliver the Service a-la-mode de
Paris, and afterwards talks immoderately nice
and dull with the Goflips, and the Midwife strut-
ting in the Front,and young Original Sin as fine,
as Fippence, follow'd with the Vocal Mufick of
Kitchen-fluff ha' you Maids, and a damn'd 7rumpe-
ter calling in the Rabble to fee a Calf with fir
Legs and a Topknot. There goes a Funeral witl.
the Men of Rosemary after it, licking their Lips
after three hits of White, Sack and Claret at the
House of Mourning, and the Sexton walking be-
fore, as big and bluff as a Beef-edter at a Corona-
tion. Here's a Poet scampers for'tas fast as hi,
Legs will carry him, and at his heels a brace .of
Bandog Bailiffs, with open Mouths ready. to de-
vour him and all the Nine Muses;, And there an
Evidence ready to spue up his false Oaths at the
light of the common Executioner.

c

hVe were jogging forward into the City,wheii
our Indian cast his Eye upon one of his own Com-
plexion, at a certain Coffee-house which has the
Sun faring its Sign in the face, even at Midnight
when the loon is Queen Regent of the Planets,
and being willing to be acquainted with his
Country-man,gravely enquir'dwhat Province or
Kingdom of India he belong'd to; but the footy
Dog could do nothing but Grin, and Ihew his
Teetig and cry, Coffee, Sir, Tea, will you please to
walk in, Sir, afrefl Pot upon my word. Wherefore
to reft our selves a little, and recover our Ears
from the deafness which the confus'd Noise of
the Street had occafion'd in 'em, we follow'd;
and at the Entrance of the Room, according to
ancient Custom, saluted the handfom Woman at
the Bar with our Hats, and took our Seats.. But
we had no sooner 'plac'd our selves, when a
Gentleman whose Sword was in' Mourning for
his extravagance, and whose Wig had out-liv'd
every fnch thing as a Curl in it, came and fate
down by usi and perceiving us to be Strangers,
under pretext of Civility accosted us with Dif-
courfcs relating to the Town, &c. The Indian,
for his part, hearken'd.to him very attentively;
but I who had been accuftom'd to such fort of
Pensioners took him aside, and told him- I had
heard the Story of Sir john several times,thatthe
Indian was a Person of Philosophy, d-c. however
he might call for a Dih' of Coffee or two, they
twere at his service, provided he wou'd spare the
repetition of his Legend to us, at a time when
there were so rmany young Fops that had both
leisure and inclination enough to believe every
vord he faid,andwould probably give him a Din-
ner for his pains.

We were no sooner got rid ofour Impertinent,
but had a hurry of Obje&s, whose every indivi-

dual,

dual wa vworthy our ftriite'A observation: Par-
rons, Lawyers, Apothecaries;, Projectors, Ex-.
cifemen,'Organifts, 'Pidurefellers, Fidlers and
Bailiffs,were the several Ingredients this Mif-
cellany of Mortality was compos'd of, and it was
eitreamly pleasant to take notice of a certaini
Mechanick, who mov'd like Clock-work, a dand-
ling another Man's Children, and as fond of'em
as if they were his own. But what call'd for our
particular observation, was a certain Triumvi-
rate ofPerfonswh ore always fond of a parti-
cular place, and are as constantly to b fee ii it-
ting on the Bench near the Fire, as a certain
Church-Warden of St. --- in the fanie Street is
givng Audience in his Shop amongst Old Tack
Philips's merry Polisicks, to Beadles, and other
Underlings of the Parilh, from Eight to Ten in
the Morning, in his Night-Cap... These Gentle-
nen, with very cogitabuzd,Afpeas, made up the
three degrees of comparison amongst 'em. The
leat of'em ito give the Company a tinture'of
his exemplary Sobriety, cry'd, I'm the moJf ablfc-
miom Man in the Wo'brld; the middlemoor for his
part, as he had nothilig ii himi, so he.pretended
to emiit nothing from him, butcontented himself
With the name of an humb1e Auditor; but tle
ialleft, like the Son of Kii,' havingfound his
two Ales manag'd 'em accordingly: As he. was
singular in the .dftion of his-Hat, so he.held 0-
pinions contrary to the reft of the Worldand he
was grown,fo scabbed with the Itch ofdifputingi
that for tlie fake of shewing [is Parts, the wvorlf
ofPerfuafions were as Orthodox with him as the
bes. Sometimes he argu'd on tle ide of Popery,
lecaufe it toleratefd Piclres, aiiother tiine Gcne-
va was a bleled Place, on account of its Inbabi-
tants not regarding 'em, whence he dcduc'd this
lucky inference, that a Mai who tbld 'em again.

C 1 .might
,I

might buy'em cheap there. Whatever the-Do&
¢aria was,Int'reit was theApplication,and Oliver
Cromrelrs Pi&ure was in more esteem with him
than Charles the Martyr's,if it bore a higher price.
This worthy;Perfon also defir'd to be amongsf
the number of the Abstemious, and knew the me-
thod prime well of talking Three Hours for a
- penny-worth of Tea; but that Man that cannot

abstain from FlejIJ in Lent, is like to pass undiftin-
guilh'd from the reft of his fellow Creatures,
whlofe Failings he's so apt to take notice of.

So many Contradictions fell from the mouth of
this rould be an Oracle, with his Hat button'd
behind, that the judicious Indian was in haft to
be gone to a Place where he might have more in-
Itrudive discourse, wherefore we left him and
lis a/ltemiois Comrades, and taking our leave of
Smoke, Noise and Nonfence made the best of our
way down tihe Exchange, without making any o-
tlfr Observations than that there were more
,4zthly Collections in one Shop than would be
fold in a trclve Mrnth, and malice and ill-nature
ii the Owner of another, than he could disperse
amonlt' his Neighhours, ihould he live to the
ne.,t Year of Jubilee.

As our way to the great Cathedral lay down
Street,;s we forbore going to fee the Place where
Peter's Wife formerly stood, to pay a Visit to
whit was consecrated to Paul. Tho'there are
People of some Persuasions that don't stick to fay
onc Temple is full as Edifying as the other, and
many Women entertain those very thoughts of
Elopement at Chutrch, which' they after put in
pradice at Taverns,. But businesses of this nature
are grown so freqient in this City,that in a short
time we Ihall founer admire at the Continency
of a Married Woman, than her want of it; and
ii ce there is no other Puniihment than for 'cm

to

to be depriv'd by AA of Parliament of the Compa-
ny they fled from, in all probability we Iall, in a
Ihort time, have more Horns of our growth here,
that are to be found in the Newr Forrefr.

After a happy deliverance from the brawling
consort of Filh-women, and those that fell Pud-
dings and Pyes on Fleet-Bridge, and our Paflage be
good King Lud, and his two Sons, where the poor
Citizens are confin'd, and Starve amidit Copies of
their Freedom, we enter'd in the Strait Gate, which
is Westward of that noble Edifice, and leads us in-
to those Paths which, as our Religion teaches us,
tend to Salvation. The multitude of Work-men,
the Bulk of the Stones, and the prodigious circum-
ference of the Pillars, amaz'd my Companion to
such a degree, that could we have met Sir Chrifto-
pher Wren, he would have paid him that A& of Ado,
ration the Place was built for an lnfinite Being to
receive. He look'd upon the labourthat was spent
in building the Chinese [Wall to be nothing to it, &,c,
however, after he was recovered from his wonder,
he could not but observe from the smallness of the
Windows,that the Builder was no Enthuliaft, and
had no Intention to make any great Boaits ofthe
Light within.

He agreed the Choir was very Magnificent, the
Iron-work exquisitely .fram'd, and nothing could be
more agreeable than the Organ, but having met
with very little that look'd like Religion before,
lince his arrival in these Parts, he fem'd inquisitive
in'relation to the numerous Congregation, and rea-
sons that brought 'em together. Wien 1 return'd
for Answer, These dark Souls in white Garments
'here come for the fake of their Salaries, and are
hi'd to ask Blessings for themselves; those Gentlc-
men that know nothing of the matter, and carry all
their Devotion in their Eyes and Ears, are Stran-
gers, and come in only to go out again ; and those La-
dies that look thro' their Fingers while thl 'rvie.

C 3
.

is S;nginJ; had never been here but for the fake of
the Mfvick and Long Perukes.

This fort of Devotion vas a new manner ofWor-
ftip, to a'Perfon who was born ina'Country where
they were such Bigots to the Profession they were
Educated in, and he exprefs'd his dislike of it in
Terms which bore a suitable abhorrence of such un-
jnftiiable 'Proceedings. Wherefore we turn'd our
hacks on Bishop Overals tall meagre Disciple, not
iaying to fee him take His Wife, alias his Reasons, in
his hand after the Service was done, and bad Adieu
to the Residentiary's Stalls, whose Owners made a
Sin re
Cure of 400 . per Annum ; while H--I was a
flretching hisLungs inorder-to maintain a long
;-hite Wig, and a Hackney Coach, and the worthy
Subdcan was chanting forth such deep Strains, as
male it appear to theFemale Audience, that tho' he
!ad not a Cnam'Ser-Voice, his Quail-Pipe sheWed him
cxcellcntly well qualify'd for- Chamber-pracice.
But beFore we got out of this venerable Dome, T
chanc'd to harrnmer out the following Stanza's, id
relation to the rebuilding it:

T is F.brick tikich atfir.ft rEas built)

o bc God's House of Prayr,
Aid not to pamper Priefls in Giilt,
' Or hold aflecping Mayor;
Onrce pcrijf'd by the vengeful Flame,
' WVhich all its Beauties raz'd,
Nor could its 'awful Patron's Name,

Protelf the Pile it rac'd.
Sut as it fel before, by-Fire,

! J.ricJ then deftroy'd it iohole,
So non to Heav'n its HIigts affire,

And rife anain by Coal.
Our dire& Way to the great place of Nolfe and
Turnmut the Royal Exchange, lying down 'Cheapfide,
we fcrbare paying a Vifit.to the Booksellers in the
Church-Yard, but left one rich old Curmudgeon
walking about his Shop in Vindication of a Perpe-

,' t*a

tual Motion, that having got by the Priesthood to
siew his Gratitude, was perpetualy cloath'd like a
Parish Clerk; another fitting behind his Compter
with multitudes of Rheamns of Divinity Waft-
Papers about him, in expeetation of some Clergy-
man or other, whom he had loft by, to take a
hearty Glass with; and a third a tearing those Cal
culations of gain in a Fury which he had made,-and
alfur'd himfelfofbefore Dampier's last unfuccefsfiul
Voyage,to haften ourArrival at that Fabrick,where
Mankind seems to be Epitomiz'd, and the diif-rent
Tempers ofHumananity in its several Species tend
to one Center; viz. Self-intert, which is account-
ed the Summum Bonium. t

But asCheapsddis a Street well furnifl'ld with
matter for Ofersation, and the Shopkeepers ftana
here on purpoi'e to be taken notice of, so it may
poflibly be :lok'd',uon as an indecency ofFer'd to
to their Efipioyiments, to pass by 'em without a
Compliment, or'an Harrangue upon their Charac-
ters ; for they are the fondest People living of being
made Publick, and rather than not be known at'all,
would be known for what ihey are. However I
must husband my observations at this time,and since
a more Convenient opportunity will offer it' self
hereafter, shall only take notice, that my Indian,
whether out ofthe several indigested Ideas he had
receiv'd from the diversity of Ob)eas he met with,
or a fort of a furprize that had laid hold of him, at
the fight of the Chimney-fweepers at the Conduit,
that look'd so much like his own Country-lien,
was taken sick in an Instant, and I was frc'd to car-
ry him to a Neighbouring Physician, whom f6me
have falfly aspers'd with the inarme of aHorfe-]DoHoi,
because he lives so near their Firniture Office.

The Worlhipful Graduate in the noble Art of
Man-slaughter, receiv'd us with a Civility that was
peculiar t0 him at the fight of four Half-Crowns,
ind tho' he had made a e Cure of mos of his, ther-

* *, - - P a , ;

tients, recover'd him from his Indisposition in an
Instant. But as the Do&or's Voluminous Works
made no ordinary Figure amongit the Refuse of the
-Learne in Duck-Laew, or those redoubted Authors
that take the benefit of the Air upon the Rails in
Mforefields, so the Method he made use of towards
his Recovery was altogether uncommon and extra-
ordinary. In a word, we were no sooner enter'd
into his Confultation-Room, but the Physician in
ordinary made hisappearancewithtwolargeFolio's
in his hands, and having ask'd me ithe ae atuof my
Friend's Distemper, (for he was not then capable
of giving him an Account of it himself ) and made
tome enquiry, witl{fis Fingers, in relation to the
Beating of the Pulse, he open'd the tremendos Page
by way of Exorcism, and fell a Reading one of the
15efcriptions of Prince A-r's Battels so patheti-
cally, that the very Noise of the Words awaken'd
the' modeit Indian out of his Lethargy, and by way
of Sympathy recover'd him from one Fright, by
putting him into another.

For Heaven's fake, said the Patient, my, dear
Friend, where are we, or what Language does that
honest Gentleman there make use of, that rattles so
mightily in the Throat, and confoundsa Man's Una-
derftanding by endeavouring to improve it ? This
is oe of our EngkFfl Doaors, cry'd I, that having
aM~rdred the People, is for extirpating the Language,
and falling foul upon every individual Syllable that
composes the Vocabulary. He's a Poet, let me tell
you, and what is more, makes Verses in his own
Coach too ; he tells a Story admirablywell in a Cos-
fe- house, ifApothecaries and Surgeons are Judges,
and has been' fmetime since made a Fool of at
Court, if there are any wife Men there. In flort,
Ee has been dignify'd with a Title for making a
King of a Prince, and whateveryou do,you must use
him as the Great ones have done, that is, flatter
him, and tell hini h's the belt Man atHeroicks in the

* '' .e~ pre-

prelent Age, or he'll dismiss you with a Pill to re&ai
fy your Judgment, that shall fend you to a Place
where a great many bold Tell-trotbs are gone before
you. If you intend to dine with him, or Sit within
ten Yards of him,up one Pair of Stairs at Garraway's
Coffee-house, you muff cry, Sir R---,your Paraphrafr
lpon Job outdoes your 7wo Ar/~-s, but for your own
dear Health's fake, don't fay in Dulness. This
thought put me in mind of some Verses a Friend of
nline wrote some time since on that inimitable Un-
dertaking,which for the Novelty of the Exprefflon,
and'the Odnefs of Thoughtl judg'd proper to com.
municate, as follow's;
When Job, contending with the Devil, Ifaw,
It did my Wonder, but not Pity draw:
For Iconcluded, that without ome Trick,
A Saint at any time could match Old Nick.
Next, ca'me afiercer Fiend upon his Back,
Imean his Spouse, and stunnd him with ier Clack
But still I could not fitty him, as knowing
ACrab-tree Cudgel soon ioud frtad hergoing.
But when the Quack engag'd with Job Ifpy'd,
The Lord have mercy on poor Job, I cry'd,
What Spouse and Satan did attempt in vain,
The Quack will compass rith his MMr'Cring Pen,
And on a Dunghi. leave poor Job again.

lmP iim'ou iloggrel he'll pollute his Theme,
And make the Saint agains his Will blaspheme.
From hence we made towards the Royal Exchange,
and between Sadlers-Hall and Woodftreet, met a
Friend of mine that deals in Linnen, standing at a
Shop doorand havingoccafion for his acquaintance,
in Order to take up some Shirts and Hankerchiefs
which Men under Poetical circumstances generally
itand in need of, I ftrnck into discourse with him,
but the first thing, as ill luck would have it, I cast

my

my eyes on, was an Inscription in several Places
the Shop, which made me almost as mute as a Fils
and was, Notruft upon Retail. - However, I refleted
to my self, that this Caveat did not exclude those
that would tick upon Wholesale. Wherefore rather
than not be a Customer, I proposed to take up feve.
ral whole Pieces by way of credit, but the Cream of
the left was, the Man knew his Trade, as also that
which I had made profession of, so that I was never
the farther from continuing Ihirtlefs from the Pro-
pofal. We were now almost come to Woodfreet Cor-
ner, when I bethought my self it was more advise-
able to go on the other fide of the fireet, than to en-
danger my Corps by coming within reach of the
Men-eaters, that stood not far off'seeking whom they
might devour, and delir'd the Indian to cross over
the way, which he did accordingly. Avoid that
Turning, said I, if you would have me for your
Companion, for it's a place of no security for a
Man who has made as much use of the Publick Faith
as I have. Those Fellows, that give their atten-
dance a little below, at the Prison Gate- I must be
plain with you, are no Company for Poets, I have
been too lately under their Clutches to desire any
more dealings with 'em, and I cannot come within
Furlong of the Rose Spunging-Houfe without Five
or Six Yellow Boys in my Pockets to cast out those
Devils there, who would otheriife infallibly tke
Pofleffion of me. With that, I told him how *fad
once ( on account ofdamn'd Neverint Vniverfi's,and
other Heretical Papers, as Notes under my Hand,
&-c. ) been confin'd there, that being without hopes
of Release, 1 had put Pen to Paper and written my
own Elegy, which being too long to be repeated, I
satisfied his Curiosity in some part, by the rehearsal
of the following Epitaph, which was the close of it

Reader, beneath this Turf I: lye,

And hold myself content,
'ifi, ifyou please, pray what care I,
Sins cn. my Life i-.fer pe; 4

A Marble Stone indeed might keep

My Body from the Weather,
And gather People as sleep

And call more Fools together:
But badJf thou been from whence Icarne,

ThWou'dfl never mince the matter,
ButJbew thy Sentiments the fame,

And hate Stone-Doublets after..
I'm dead, and that's enough t' acquaint

A Man ofany Sense,
f'bat ifhe's lookingfor a Saint,

He muftgofarther hence.
Between two Roses down I fell,

As 'twixt two Stools a Platter
One held me up exceeding well

t'other did 'nofuch matter:
The Rose by Temple-Bar gave Wine,

Exchang'dfor Chalk andfill'd me,
But being for the Ready Coin,

The Rose in Wood-ftreet kill'd me.
My Companion was pleas'd to fee me so merry
under my Affli&ion, but'being of agenim altogether
full of Speculation, diverted the Discourse to more
material enquiries in Relation to Trade, which he
saw was the whole Business of our Citizens.

While I behold this'Town of London, said our
Contemplative Traveller, I fancy I behold a Prodi-
gious Animal. The Streets are as so many Veins,
wherein the People Circulate. With what Hurry
andSwiftnefs is tle Circulation of London per-
form'd ? You behold, cry'd Ito him, the Circulation
that is made in the Heart of London, but it moves
more briskly in the Blood of the Citizens, they are
always in MotionandA&ivity. Their Aions fiic-
ceed one another with. so much Rapidity, that they
begin a Thousand Things before they have finilh'd
one, and finilh a thousand others before they may
properly be said to have begun them.

They are equally uncapable both of Attention

and

and Patience, and tho' nothing is more quick, than
the Effe&s of Hearing and Seeing; yet they don't
allow themselves time either to Hear or See; but
like Moles, work in the Dark, and Undermine one
another.

All their Study and Labour is either about Profit,
or Pleasure; and they have Schools for the Educa-
tion of their Stalking-Horfes, which they call Ap-
prentices in the Mystery of Trade. A Term urlin-
telligible to Foreigners, and which none truly un,
derftand the Meaning of, but those that pra&ice it.
Some call it Over-writing those they dealwith, but that
is generally denied as a Heterodox Definition ;' for
Wit was never counted a London Commodity,un!efs
among their Wives, and other City Sinners; aind if
you search all the Warehouses and Shops, s:on
Irhite-Chapel Bars to St. Clemen's, if it were to if ve
a Mans Life, or a Womans Honesty, you can-not
find one Farthing-worth of Wit among them.

Some derive this Heathenish Word Tradc from
an Hebrew Original,and callit Over-reaching, but the
ewss deny it,and fay the Name and Thing is wholly
Chriflian; and for this Interpretation quote theAut
thority ofa London Alderman, who fold a yew five
Fatts of Right-handed Gloves,without any Fellows
to them, and afterwards made him purchase- the
Left-handed ones to Match them, at double the Va-
lue.

Some call Trade Honest Gain, and to make it more
Palatable, have lacker'd it with the Name of Godli-
ness; and hence it comes to pass, that the Generali-
ty of Londoners are accounted such Eminent Profef-
fors; but of all GuelTers, he conies nearest the Mark
that said, Trade was playing a Game at Loflig Loa-
dmnr, or dropping Fools Pence into Knaves Pockets,
till the Sellers were Rich, and the Buyers were Bank-
rlipts.

That Magnificent Building, there which frands
i, the Middle of L£odpn, is for the Acconimodationl

at

of the Lady Trade, and her Heirs and Succeflors for
(:;er, and is so full of Amusements about Twelve a
Clock every Day,thatbne would thinkallthe World
was converted into News-mongers and Intelligen-
cers; for that's the firit Salutation among all Man-
kind that frequent that Place: What News from
Scandaroon and Aleppo ? fays the Turkey Merchant.
What Price bears Currants at Zant ? Apes at Tnis ?
Religion at Rome ? Cutting a Throat at Naples ?
Whores at Venice ? And the Cure of a Clap at Pa-
dlr. ?

What News of such a Ship? fays the Insurer,
Is there any hope of her being Cast away, fays the
Adventurer, for I have Insured more by a Thoufandc
Pounds,thanl have I havein her ? So have I through
Mercy, fays a second, and therefore let's leave a
Letter of Advice for the Master at the New Light-
House at Plimouth, that he does not fail to touch at
the Goodmin-Sands, and give us Advice of it from
Deal, or Canterbury, and he ihall have another Ship
for his Faithful Service as soon as he comes to Lon-
don.
I have a Bill upon you, Brother, fays one Alder-
man to another. Go Home, Brother,faystheother,
and if Money and my Man be Absent, let my Wife
pay. you out of her Pri:y-Purfe, as your Good Wife
lately Paid a Bill, at Sightfor me, I thank her Lady-
lhip.

Hark you,Mr. Broker, I have a Parcel of excellent
Log-wood, Block-tin, Spiders Brains,. Philosophers
Guts, Don eQuixot's Windmils, Hens-Teeth, Ell-
Broad Pack-Thread, and the Quintefcence of the
Blue of Plumbs. Go you Puppy, you are fit to be a
Broker, and dont know that the GreJhamites buy up
all there Rarities by Wholesale all the Year,and Re-
tail them out to the Society every firIt of Afril.

Hah, Old Acquaintance ! ouchFlefJ: I hre been
seeking thee all the Change over. I have a pressing
Occasion for tfome Seeds of Sedition, .c:. te Rue:,

an:i

and Whig Herb of Grace, Can'st furnilh me ? Indee
lau, no; faith the Merchant, I have just parted wit
them to the several Coffee-Houses about the Town
where the refpe&ive Merchants meet that Trade i
those Commodities; but if you want but a fnall
Parcel, you may be supplied by Mrs. Bald-n, o
Da-y, and his Son-in-Law Bel and Clapperand mol
Booksellers in London and Westminster. Da, da, I'
about it immediately. Stay a little Mr. ----
have a Word in private to you. If you know any
of our Wbig Friends that have occasion for any
Stanch Votes for the Choice of Mayors or Sheriffs
that were Calculated for the Meridian of London
but will serve indifferently for any City or Corpo
ration in Europe, our Friend Mr. Pats--l has abun.
dance that lie upon his Hands, and will be glad to
dispose of them a good Penny-worth. Enough, said
the other, They are no Winters Traffick, for tho'
Mayors and Woodcoks come in about Michaelma;
they don't lay Springes for Sheriffs till about Mid:
fumer, and then we'll talk with him about those
weighty Matters.

There stalks a Sergeant and his Mace, smelling
at the Merchants Backsides, like a Hungry Dog for
a Dinner.

There Walks a Publick Notary tied to an Ink-
horn, like an Ape to a Clog, to put offhis Heathen-
Greek Commodities, Bills of Store, and Charter
Parties.

That wheeling sickly Shew,with his Breeches full
of the Prices of Male and Female Commodities,
Proje&s,Complaints,and all Mismanagements from
Dan to Beerflieba, is the Devil's Broker, and may tb
spoken withal every Sunday from eleven in the moi'-
ning till four in the afternoon, at the next Quakers
Meeting, to iis Lodging, and not after ; for the reft'
of his tSne on that Day he employs-in adjusting his
Accompts, and playing at Back-gammon with his
Principal. -There goes a Rat-cartcer in ifate, bran-

diihing

dilhing nis Banner like a Blackamoor in a Pageant
on the Execution-day ofRoaft-Beef, greafie Geese,
and Custards., And there sneaks a Hunger-ftarv'd
VfUier of a Drugfter, in quest of a crazyCitizen for
vfe or Continuance-money, whom the other shuns as
carefully as a Serjeant, and avoids with as mich In-
duftry as he does making up his Accounts with God
Almighty.

Now fay I to my Indian, Is. not all this Hodg-podg
a pleasant Confusion, and a perfed Amusement?
The atonilh'd Traveller replied, Without doubt
the indigeftedChaos was but an imperfe&Reprefen-
tation ofthis-congregated Huddle. But what mol:
amuses my Understanding is, to hear 'em speak all
Languages, and talk of nothing but trucking and
bartering, buying and felling, borrowing and lending,
paying and receiving; and yet I fee nothing they
have to dispose of, unless those that have 'em fell
their Gold Chains, the Brasiers their Leathern A-
prons, the young Merchants their Swords, or the
old ones their Canes and Oaken Plants,that support
their feeble Carcases. That Doubt, quoth I to my
inquisitive Indian, is easily folv'd, for tho' their
groler Wares are'at home in theirStorehoufes,they
have many things of value to truck for, which' they
always carry about 'em; as, JJflice'for fat Capons,
to be deliver'd before Dinner; a Reprieve from the
Whippinig-poft for, a d/oz.n Bottles of Claret to drink
after it; Licenses to 'ell Ale for a- Hbgjlead of Stout
to his Worship; and Leave to keep a Cofiee-houfe,
for a Cask of Coli ea to his Lady. Name but what
you want, and 'll 'ditre you to the Walks whelre
you shall find the Merchants that will furnish you.
Would you buy the Common Hunt, the Common Cyers,
the Bridge-mafter's, 6r- the Keeper: of Newgate's Pla-
ces ? Stay till they fall, and a GoldrChain and great:
Horse will dire& yoiu to the Proprietors. Would
you buy any Naked Truth, or Light in a dark Lant-
horn ? Look in the Wet;-Ouker's Walk, Have you

occa-

occasion for Comb-brufhes, Tweezers, Cringes 6t
Complements A la mode ? The French Walk will sup.
ply you. Want you old Cloaks, plain Shoes, or
formal Gravity ? You may fit your self to a Cows-
Thumb among theSpaniards. Have you any Use in
your Country for uprightHonejty ordownright
Dealing ? You may buy plenty of 'em both among
the Stockjobbers, for they are dead Commodities,
and that Society are willing to quit their hands of
'em. Would you lay out your Indian Gold for a newr
Plantation ? Enquire for the Scotch Walk, and you'll
buy a good Pennyworth in Darien. Three of your
own Kings for as many new Hats, and all their
Nineteen Subje&s into the Purchase, to be deliver'd
at the Scotch Eaft-India-Offce, by ParfonPattifon, or
their Secretary Wisdom Webster. If ybu want any
Tallow, Rapparee's Hides, or PopiJh MalTacres, en-
quire in the Irifj Walk, and you cannot lose your
labour: But I am interrupted.

Look Yonder's a /ew treading upon an Italian's
Foot, to carry on a Sodomitical Intrigue, and Bar.
tering their Souls here, for Fire and Brimstone in
another World.

See,there's a Beau that has Play'd away his Estate
at a Chocolate-Houfe, going to Sell himfelfto Bar-
badoes, to keep himfelfout of Newgate, and from
Scandalizing his Relations at Tyburn.

There's a Poet Reading his Verfes,and squeezing
his Brains into an Amorous Cit's pockets, in hopes
of a Tester to buy himself a Dinner.

Behind that Pillar is a Welch Herauld, deriving a
Merchant's Pedigree from Adam's Great-Grand-
father, to entitle him to a Coat of Arms, when he
comes to be an Alderman.

Take notice of that tall black Gentleman; there
is -carce a Merchant-fnip at Sea but he has a Share
in her, and scarce a Corporation in England that he
has not been Tampering with for the Choice of
M-b-rs of P.---:. Would vou think a Man of

his

his Appearance hlad been brought;upon, his Knees
lieforethe. H---- of C---:, or, that a Perfonoffo'
goodly and vise an Aspect could be fpew'd out of a
Place, where. only wire 2sien flould meet together.
But more unlikely things have come to pafs,witnefs
that Merry A----- Fortune there, who has neither
Parts nor.Countenance to recommend himto any
Gonverfation but that of-the Fair Sex, yet.he.keeps
his Plqcej and Represents the Town that Chose him,
to a Miracle. Say that he camie in by Bribery if
.you dare, his Gifts are Ads of Charity, and 'tis He-
retical to fay that lie is not a Godly Conscientious
Man, in making himfelfrGreat by providing for the
Poor. - He give Money ! 'Tis no such thing.; he
Builds'Hoatues, in order to get into oneand:pull downi
our Constitution. A pleasant fort of a Spark ! the
Mayorand Aldermen OfR--d--g can, never. wait a
Representative while. Spinning of-Flax goes on foi
imerrily.among 'emi nor.the City of.L/---want. g,
-I---, while such as he are fuffer'dto set up for Chief
Magifirate. However his Wife has another Opi-
nion of him, and she that shew'd her wisdom in the
Choice of such a Husband, thinks hefhews his in be-
ing Chosen forfuch aC-p--tion. Butthatuniaccdun-
table Knight there has, more Comedy in him than
all his Fellow Citizens besides. Ask on what day
the New War with France and Spain is to be Pro-,
claim?d, he'll tell you he knows the Time to a Se-
cond of a Minute;. defire,'to know of him when the
King comes over from Holland,.or whereabouts in
the Neatherlands the firit Hostilities will break out
and he'll lay 7Te to One he points out the Time and
Place to you. Would you be told whatheis worth;
you are to be inform'd he is better ftock'd with Pro-
jeas than any New Eafj-Indian of'em all; and .wherd
lie chiefly fignaliz'd his Courage, you'l be.anfwer'd,
in the famous Camlpaign the City Regifmcit mradc,
and at 7Tiinbridge,: wbere a damn'd unlucky Pipin
made him ave him/elf after he: had loft his kcMnej.

D ' '--
, 'As

As he was made a Knight from a Nems-monger, so he
is again become a Game'ser from a Sh-, and if I
was to venture a Wager on his fide, it ihould be,
that the first thiing he did was to lay one, neither
would I refuse to go his Halves, would he make
these the Conditions on which he ventur'd his Mo-
ny, viz. That the C-p--tion of B-b-r in Suffex
and S-d-ch in Kent don't know his Abilities so
well as I do: That he is not Master of those For-
tunes which the World thinks him to be, nor Pof-
feflbr ofthat Magazine of Brains he himfelfwould
have us think he is; That whatever he has done
by way of Stock-jobbing other Commodities, the
L-ds D-- S- and H-- can witness from his
Conversation at Garraway's. He never monopo-
liz'd Wit, or engrofs'd any thing like it to his own
iife. These Propositions would bring us both in
Money, and his Sagacity would run a less rifque in
laying on their fide, than he did tome Years since a-
bout the Siege of Namur. But he hasgotfome Wa-
ger in his Head, and is March'd off with his Chap-
man to a Publick Notary to confirm it: And so much
for Sir H-.

Why first here is a Ship to be fold, with all her
Tackle and Lading. There are Virtuous Maidens
that are willing to be Transported with William
Penn into Maryland, for the Propagation of Quake.
rifm. In another is a T71tor to be hired, to inftrud
any Gentleman's, or Merchant's Children in their
own Families: And under that an Advertisement
of a Milch-Ass, to be fold at the Night-Man's in
lyhite-Chapple. In another Columnin a Gilded-Frame
was a Chamber-Maid that wanted a Service; and
over her an Old Batchelor that wanted a House-
keeper. On the fides of these were two less Papers,
one containing an Advertisement of a Red-headed
M'ionkey, loifcfrom a Seed-Shop in the Strand, with
two Guineas Reward:-to him or her that shall bring
him Home again with his Tail and Collar on. On

the

the other fide was a large Folio fill'd with Wet and
Dry Nurses; and Houses to be Lett; and Parrots,
Canary-Birds, and Setting Dogs to be fold.

Having no occasion for. Wet-Nurfes,.~c. since
my Children fat by other Folks Fires, and being
desirous to give my Indiai a fight of the most Re-
markable things my time would allow me; we
fqueez'd out of the throng of Cuckolds, and went
to make a .visit to the Madmen. in Morefields..

Bedlam is a pleasant Piece, that it is, and abbunds
with Amusements ; the first of which is the build-
ing so stately a Fabrick for Peffons wholly unfenfi'
ble of the Beauty and Use of it: The Outside is a
perse' Mockery to the Inside, and admits of two
Amusing Queries, Whetherthe Persons that order-
ed the Building it, or those that Inhabit it, were the
Maddest? And whether the Name and Thing be
not as disagreeable as Harp and Harrow ? But what
need I wonder at that, since the whole 'is but one
entire Amusement: Some were Preaching, and o-
thers in full Cry a Hunting. 'Some were Praying,
othes Curling and Swearilig. Some weie Dancing,
others Groaning. Some Singing, others Crying,
and all in perfec Confusion. A fadReprefentationL
of the greater Chimetical World, only in this there's
no Whoring, Cheating, or Sleeping, unless after
the Platonib Mode, in Thought, for want of A&ion.
However, any Gentleman that is difpos'd for a Touch
of the Times may take his Choice for the Price of i
Penny, which is Cerberus his Fee at the- Entry; or
any Lady that has got the Prurigo Copulandi has a
Spark at her Service to be found walking here any
time of the day. Is your Wife, or your Daugh-
ter Mad for something that flall be nameless ? fend
'em hither to be made Sober; or has any one a Rez
lation Male or Female that is over-baihful ? let not
either Him or her difpair of a cure, for here are
Guerts enough to teach 'em to part with their Mo-
deity; As the Buildings took their Magniiccce

o) 2 'rSo

from a Pallace at Paris, so the Company that resort
to make alfignations within 'em, very often bring
ofi'the Parisian Distemper from the Bottled Ale and
Cheesecakes, which are eaten after they are Coupled
and gone out of'em, and if we have been Witty up-
on the Frecch in giving Bedlam the Resemblance of
the Louvre,they have been even with us to awitnefs,
by making a present of a Disease to us, which may
be bargainld for with no more difficulty than halfa
Turn in the Long Gallery. Here were Persons Con-
fined-that having no Money nor Friends, and but a
imall Stock of Confidence, run Mad for want of
Prefermlnt. A Poct that, for want of Wit and
Sense, run Mad for want of Vituals; and a Hard-
favour'd Citizens IWife,that loft her Witsbecaufe her
Husband had fu little as to let her know that he
kept a Handfomrliftrefs. Inthis Apartment was
a Common Lar)yer Pleading; in another a Civilian
Sighing ; a third enclofeda Yacobite Ranting againfI
the Revolution; and a fourth a Morose Melancholy
hii'iig, bemoaning his want of an Office, and conm-
plaining against Abuses at Court, and Mismanage-
ments. A fifth had a Comical fort of a Fellow,that
was Laughing at his Phytician DoAor Tyson, for his
jrcat skill in Taciturnity; and a lixth, had a Canta-
brigian Organist for his Tenant, that had left Son-
net and Madrigal for Philosophy, and had loft his
Senses for a Fooli while he was in pprfiit of Know-
ledge. How now ! said I, honeIt Friend, what dolt
thou think of Materia Prima and the refl of the pre-
tended Entities ? I think, said he, if you thought of
em at all you would ask a more pertinent question,
for I am MIad because I know nothing of the lat-
ter, when thou art so much in love with jgnorance,
Lthou wouldst have loft thy wits if thou' hadst. I ex-
pecte:- not such a home reply from a Bethlemite, and
without any more to do.with such a Touchy spark,
L: hiim railiilg againfi the Sin of Murthering of
i.ic :,'.ild '{hc,~i.i: his detecfation againfl eariull

/,ioot

good Roast Mutton, as a Cruelty tathe Creatures,
to take aflight of a Young Fellow quite Dumfoundr
ed with Love. Poor Lad, his Mother and two Sifr
ters that are Milliners in Oxford, I dare swear, will
never keep him Company, for they know a Trick
worth two of his, and have often Experinlented
that if one won't, another will. Here was Biliop the
Qujaker a Preaching,and an AudienceofModefr Wo-
nlen peeping thro' their Fingers to fee whether'his
Notes were written in Legible Charaders or no, and
there was a Shopkeeeper's Wife retailing out the
fight of the best in Christendom, for a Half-pen-;
ny a Head to young Templers, Morefield Sharpers,
and old Citizens that had taken the Opportunity of
their Wives being abroad, and being ready to run
Mad themselves, were come to divert themselves
with the fight ofthofe that were actually so.

Miffing many others, whom I thought deserved a
Lodging among their Brethren, I made Enquiry as-
ter them, and was told by tlie. Keeper, they had
many other HouTes of the fame Foundation.in the
City, where they were disposed till they. grew Ta-
met, and were qualified to be admitted Members of
this Soberer Society. The Projedors who are gene-
rally Brokeln Citizens, were coop'd up in the covn,
ters and Ludgate. The Beaux, andRakes,andCom-,
mon Mad Jilts, that labour under a Furor Zteribi in
Bridemell. and Justice Long.'s: Powdering-Tub; and
the Virtuosi .were confined to GreJam Colledec.
Those, continned'he in whose Constitutions Folly
has the Ascendant over Frenzy, are permitted to
Reside and be. Smoaked in Coffee-Houses; 3and
those that by the Governours of-this Hospital, are
thought utterly Incurable, are fliut up with a pair
of Foils, a Fiddle, and, a Pipe, in the Inns of Court
and Chancery; and when their Fire and Spirits are
''xhaufted, and they begin to Dote, they are remov-
td i)y Habeas Corpm into a certain Hospital built for
ilat purpose near 4Amen-Corner..

D V Waltk-'

Walking from hence, I had leisure to ask my JI.
dian his Opinion of these Amusements, who after
the best manner his Genius would susser him, ha-
rangued upon Deficiency of Sense, as the only Be-
neficial Quality, fiace the bare pretences to Wit was
attended by such Tragical Misfortunes, as Confine-
ment to Straw, Small Drink, and Flogging.

Hearing a Noise and some approaches of Non-
fence that always bears it Company, where should
we ftep but into C-pp-gate Church,and whom flould
I fee Perch'd up in a Pulpit, but Honest Orthodox
E- S-,'as knowi n a Divine as ever P.-- with a
Bible in his Pocket,a spreading the Word very dex-
troufly. Hey day ! cry'd 1, nonjuring Man has left
off cheating People in a Coat, to put Tricks upon
the World in a Gown! I wish his Dutch Merchant
was here to be one of his Auditors, that he might
be fatisfy'd, the Reverend Dr. is not fuih a Man
as he reports him to be: He laid forth the Blef-
iings of a Handfom Wife most emphatically, and i
expeded every Minute to hear when the C-tyK-ve
would have invited his Male Auditors home to fee
hi, according to ancient Custom; but he's grown
more Politick since he had Father'd °Afop at Tun-
bridge, and was abundantly more referv'd, since he
had read overthofe two Laborious works, the Whole
Duty of Man Epitomls'd, and Dr. Taylor's holy living
and dying; and 'twould have done a Man under Poe-
tical Circumstances good, to think how powerfully
he laid himself out, to perfwade liis Hearers to be
Charitable to the Poor, as if he was Begging for
himfelf,and reading his own wantsto the Audience
ii the Life of his own unhappy Mendicant. 'Slife,
thought I, we must drink together, but imagining
from the drift of his discourse the Parson was Pen-
nylefs, awvay went I up Redcrofs-ftreet leaving
him to come down from his borrow'd Pulpit, as soon
as he had finish'd his borrow'd Harangue, to make
the bcft of his way to his Eloquent and Reverend

B ro:

ther, and deliver the Gown he borrotv'd of him, oil
such an Emergent occasion as Ihewing his Parts.

Now I that am always more scared at the fight
of a Sergeant or Bailiff than at the Devil and all his
Works, was mortallyfrightedin mypafage through
Barbican and Long-Lane, by the Impudent Ragfellers,
in tlofe Scandalous Climates, who laid hold of my
Arm to ask me what Ilack'd ? At first it made me
tremble worse than a Quaker in a Fit of Enthu-
fiafm, imagining it had been an Arrest, and was
just asking the customary Queftion,at whose Suit,but
their Rudeness continuing at every Door, relieved
me from those Pannick Fears ; and the next that
attack'd my Arm with What ye buy, Sir, Whfatye
lack ? I threw him from my Sleeve into the Kennel,
faying, Tho' I want nothing out of your Shops, me-.
thinks you all want good Manners and Civility,
that are ready to tear a New Sute from my back,
under pretence of felling mean Old one; AvantVer-
mine, your Cloaths smell as rankly of Newgate and
Tyburn, as the Bedding to be fold at the Ditchfide
near Fleet-bridge smells of a Bawdy-house and Brandy,

Smithfield would have afforded us a great variety
of Objefts,but it being neither Bartholomew-Fair tine,
nor any of the chief Market-days, I pafled.thro' the
Quarters of the Jockeys, and Graziers, and tak-
ing the Clancular Roads, that were most agreeable
to my Circumstances, I went thro' Baldwins-Gar-
dens, and whom lhould I fee standing at the Door of
the Hole in the Wall, but an old acquaintance of
mine, an honest Dear yoy,that had taken the House;
and as the Gentlemen of that Country are Famous
for being Men of particular Ceremony, so the sirs'
word that came from him, was, Master, I am yowur
very Humble Servant ; and the next, Hey,yo i Bafrard,
you, on accouint of my putting a Civil question, re-.
lating to two young Ladys looking thro' their Fin-,
gers at him.

ie was. iim.mdiately for Prefentihg me with a an-.

-D ·A kv>(W:;

klrd ; and down my Fellow Traveller a-nd I fate
our selves, when I found my Neighbour K-- had
been new Christened since I saw him last, and was
made a Corn miflion-Officer by the Name of Captain
Whip 'em. I made no enquiry afterthe Etymologyof
his new Title, but Judg'd he had been Whipping it
in with the Gentlewomen before mention'd, tho'
'twas not convenient to tell him so, least his Wife
Ihould watch his waters more narrowly than lhe
had done, whicl might have been no small Grief to
the two Virtuolns LSadies, and a great difappoirt-
inent to a Man ofhis known Modesty. I'll fay that
for the Man, his- Liquor was the best of the fort
that ever I drank, had his Company been anfwera-
bhe to it, but there .as such a Jargon of contradic-
tions among 'em, such a difference of Trades and
Opinions,and such an unintelligible Captain among
em, that my poor Indian and I were in a - perfect
Wilderness. To pay-there, said I, and so left the
witty.Dogs by thenfelves, and a Bookbinder talk-
ing about the Adventures of him and two or three
.ioirc Gentlemen ,' to make. the best of my way thro'
Gray's Inn, where I met with nothing Material.

This was all we entertain'd our selves with, be-
fore we came to the Play-Houufe.

A MUSE M EN T iVy

The Play-_hlofe.
HE Play-House is an Inchanted Island, where
T nothing appears in Realitywhatit is,norwhat
it ihould be. 'Tis frequented by Persons ofall De-
grees and Qualities whatsoever; that have a great
deal of Idle Time lying upon their Hands,and can't
tell how to employ it worse. Here Lords come to
Laugh, and to be Laugh'd at for being there, and

"- . ·
' ; '
* feeing

feeing their Qualities ridicul'd by every Triobola-
ry Poet. Knights come hither to learn the Amo-
rous Smirk, the A4/ mode Grin, the AntickBowthe
|ewelf Falhion'd Cringe; and how to adjust their
phiz, to make themselves as Ridiculous by Art as
they are by Nature.

Hither come the Country Gentlemen to shew
their Shapes, and trouble the Pit with their Imper-
tinence about Hawking, Hunting, and their Hand-
some Wives, and their Housew.ifery.

There fits a Beau like a Fool in a Frame, that
dares not stir his iead, nor move his Body,for fear
of incommoding his Wig, rufling his Cravat, or
putting his Eyes or Moutlh *ut of the Order his
Maitre de Dance set it in, whilt a Bully Beau comes
drunk into the Pit, Screaming out, Damn me, Jack,
tis a Confounded Play, let's'to a Whore and spend our
time better. Here tho Ladies come to flew their
Cloaths, which are often the only things to be ad-
mir'd in or about'em. Some ofthem.llaving Scab'd,
or Pimpled Faces, wear a thousand Patches to hide
them, and those that have none, scandalize their
Faces by a Foolifll imitation. Here they shew their
Courage by being unconcerned at a Husband being
Poifon'd, a Hero being Kill'd, or a Paflionate Lovec
being Jilted: And discover their Modefties by sand-
ing Buffat a Baudy Song, or a Naked Obscene Si-
gure. By the Signs that both Sexes hang out, you
may know their Qualities or Occupations, and not-
miftake,iA nlaking your Addrefles. Men of Figure
and Consideration are known by seldom being
there, and Men of 1F'ifdomand Business, by being al-
ways absent. The L- D- is known by his Rib-
bon, and T-- D--- or some other Impertinent
Poet, talking Norifence to him; the L- - by
fitting on the Kitcat fide, and Yacob T- tanding
Doorkeeper for him ; the reft of the Witty No-ity
have their fevcral diftinguifning Chara&erifticks,
ttld those that are the calicit things to be undcrflood

, ~~~ ~
.,, ~ ~ ~ ~
. in

<

in the Universe: As for initance, that Toafrer there;
is it Possible he can give a Judgment of the Beauties
of a Play, while he is wholly taken up in Surveying
those of the Ladies? or that incorrigible Fop know
any thing of the Matter, that is taking such pains
not to know himself, as to be carry'd away with
the thoughts that all Eyes were six'd upon him on
account of his amazing Perfetions, when the quite
contrary cause diverts the Audience from what
they came to take a view of ?

Would you think that little Lap-dog in Scarlet
there,has Stomach enoughto digef a Guinea's worth
of Entertainment at Poitack's every Dinner-time,or
that Odoriferous 7Tme-ferver there had nothing he
so much laid to Heartas the Disappointment of not
having his Whore brought to him at the Fountain
Tavern, after the Curtain is let down again ?

Hey-day! what have we here ? A Dutchefs,and
a Dutchman together, Pepper and Vinegar on my
Conscience, only'tis a difficult time of the Year,and
People that lye so close together, are warm enough
without any fuich matters to heat 'em. But that
Poet there, that shews his Affidifity by following
yonder Aarefs, is the most entertaining fort of an
Animal imaginable. But 'tis the vay of the World,
to have an Efteem.for the fair Sex, and She looks
to a Miracle when She is acting a Part in one of his
own Plays. Would not any one think it pitty She
Ihould not have an Humble Servantwhen Jhat Mrs.
Abigal there, who is one of her Attendants can be
brought to Bed of a Living Child without any man-
ner of notice taken of her. Look upon him once
more I fay, if She goes to her Shift 'tis Ten to One
but he follows her, not that I would fay for never fa
much to take up her Smock ; he Dines with her al-
moft.ev'ry day, yet She's a Maid, he rides out with
her, and visits her in Publick and Private, yet She's
a Maid; if I had not a particular refpet for her, I
thould go near to fay he lies with her, yet She's a

Maid..
' ' ' S ''' ' '~~~~~~~..,,

Mald. Now I leave the World to Judge whether
it be His or Her Fault that She has so long kept
her Maidenhead, since Gentlemen of his Profeifion
have generally a greater Refpet for the Lady's than
that comes to.

Now for that Majestical Man and Woman there,
Rand off,there is no coming within a Hundred Yards
of their High blightineffes, they have revolted like
the Dutch from their once Lords and AMafters and
are now set up for Sovereigns themselves. See
what a deference is paid 'em by the reft of the
Cringing Fraternity from Fifty down to ten Shil-
lings a week $ and you mult needs have a more than
Ordinary Opinion of their Abilities: Should you
ley withher all Night, She would not know you
next Morning, unless you had another five Pound
at her Service ; or go to desire a piece of Courtesy
of him,you must attend longer than at a Secretary's
of State. His Gravity will nbt permit him to give
you Audience till the Stateliness of his Countenance
is rightly adjusted, and all his high swelling Words
are got in readynefs, nor will her Celebrated Mo-
defty suser her, nimoft to speak to an Humble Ser-
vant without a Piece or two to rub her Eyes with,
and to conceal her Bluflies, while She SluggiJfly goes
through a Vacation She might take more Pains in,
did the not Grudge a Pennyworth for a Penny.

There are two setts of there Hiftrionical Enter-
tainers, and I- hould be too partial Ihould I not di-
vide my thoughts equalybetween'em,both are call'd
His Majefry's Servants, yet neither have done any
Serviceto their Kingor Country;. if we may take
Mr. Collier's word, or the Affidavits of a multitude
ofdecay'd Beaux who have been undone and after-
wards lqught at by 'em.

Do but.take notice of that Scornful Piece of Flefli
there, does not She Tread the Stage as Haughtily
as if.She knew no such thing as Condefcention to
the desires of any Man Breathing;yet Shewas found-

ly

ly beaten by a Spark of hers, for opening her Legs to
another humble Servant. I would not for the wealth
of the Indies divulge any harm to her, but a Person
might fay without the help of a Prophetick Caffan-
dra, that it will not be for want of flewing her: en-
deavours for the Publick Good, that fle does not
bring his Majesty a New Subject into the World
this Year, as Ihe did the last; and I dare swear that
her Ingenious Friend Mr. S-, tho'. his Modesty
will not permit him to be the Father of it, will be
ready at all times and,feafons to fetch out the Vel-
vet Petticoat, that may occasionally be in Trouble,
on account of the decency of her next Lying-in.

From this Lady that is always Quarelfom with
the Prompter, and who has enough of that Grand
IliLe in the middle of hcr, without any other di-
iturbances of that Nature about her; it falls out of
Courfr, that we pay our Refpets to that Bewitch-
ing Crcature,' that has entangled a very great Man
into her Noose; and from so mean a Beginning as
Pippins, finall Nuts and Gingerbread, has the Ho-
nour to have a Noblenan wear her Chains. The
Virtuous Gentlewoman before mention'd was li-
:eally descended from a Retailer of Rumps and Kid-
neys, and had greater Pretentions from her Birth to.
the smiles of Fortune than her Hypocritical LadiJljp,
that owes her being to a Aiother,,wliopoorWoman,
would not be forc'd to begg, were she as young a bit
of Flefli as her Daughter, had fhe'as luch Natural
Afe&ion for a Parent as Ihe for a Gallant.

A.may with her, cry'd out the Indian, if Jie's una-
tura! le's no Mistress fcr me; but it's a Custom aminonr
you Europeans toforget Father and Mfother, and .ceave
to yur. own Interest Tour People of the highefJ. Rank
pratFire it daily; and oouldyou thkink this Woman, that
mimicks 'em in their Cloaths and .FafJions, would. behave
ber fef so vtlgarly,as not to imitate 'em ? As my Com-
!a nion had nothing but Truth in his Obfcrvations,
so I could not contradif, htis Opinion qs ush but tur-

red

ned my Eye upon the Boxes, to let him know there
were some of the Fair Sex in that bright Circle,that
were Exceptions to his General Rule. Let us lose no
more time about her, said I, you have seen all file
has, but the Furniture of her Chamber, and that
fh¢ may thafik the D- for; as to her clean Gloves
and Finery here, they are owing to the old good-
natur'd Mr. R-- , who from his drowfie Conftitu-
tion in the Day-time, makes it appear that some or
other has difturb'd his Reft in the Night. That
Beau there is known by the decent management of
his Sword-knot and Snmif-box; a Poet, by his empty
Pockets; a Citizen, by his Horns and Gold Hat-
band; a TWhore, by a Vizor-mask and the multitude
of Ribbons about her Breast ; and a Fool, by talling
to her: A Playhouse Wit is diftinguinl'd by wanting
Understanding; and a fiudge of Wit, by nodding
and sleeping till the fall of the Curtain, and crowd-
ing to get out again awake him.

I have told you already, that the PI.yhofoe was
the Land of Enchantmenr, the Count.ry of Metamorpho-
sis, and perform'd it with the greatest speed imagi-
nable. Here, in the twinkling of an Eye, you flall
fee Men transform'd into Demi-gods, and Goddcfes
made as true Flelh and Blood as our Common FWo
men. Here Fools by flight of hand are converted
into Wits, Hone f Wom77e into errand Whores, and
which is most miraculous, ',Cowards into valiant He-
roes, and rank Coquets and i;lts into as chaste and
virtuous Miflreffes as a Man would delire to put his
Knife into.

Let us now speak a word or two of the Natives of
this Country, and the Stock of Wit and MAaners by
which they maintain themselves, and ridicule tlhe
whole World betides. The People are all somewhat
mbimfical andgiddy-brain'd; when they peak they
ing, when they walk they dance, aind veio often do
both when they have no mind to it.

The Stage has now so great a share of Atheifn;,

I1 i-

Impudence and Prophanenefs, that it looks like all
Afiembly of Demons, dire&ing the Way Hellward X
and the more blasphemous the Poets are, the more
are they admir'd, even from huffing Dryden-to sing-
song D'Vrfey, who always flutters at Sense, and
speaks plain when he swears.. What are all their
new Plays but damn'd insipid dull Farces, confounds
ed toothless Satyr, or plaguy rhiming Plays, with
Scurvy Heroes, worse than the Knight of the Sun, oi
Amadis de Gaul ? They are the errantft Plagiaries in
Nature, and, like our common News-iriters, fteai
from one-another.

When a Humor takes in London, they ride it to
death e're they leave it: The Primitive ChriJfiani
were not persecuted with half that variety as the
poor Vnthinking Beaux are tormented with upon the
Theatre: Clara,4er they supply with a smutty Song,
tiumor with a Dance, and Argument with Lightning
and 7mender, which has oft repriev'd many a scurvy
Play from Damning. A huge great Muff, and a gau-
dy Ribbon hanging at a Bully's backside, is an ex-
cellent Jefe; and new-invented Curses, as, Stap my
Vitals, Damn my Diaphragm, Slit my Windpipe, Sink me
Ten thousand fathom deep ; rig up a new Beau, tho' in
the main 'tis but the fame everlasting Coxcomb;
and there's as much difference between their Rhimes
andfolid Verse, as between the Royal Pfalmifl and
Hfopkins and Ster-hold, with their Collars of Ay's and
Eke's about 'em. Wherefore let us. take a Voyage
into the Land of Wit, since there is so little flirring
now-adays in the Playhouse, and make an infpe&ion
into the growth of that Commodity elsewhere.

A M u s EM E NT V.

Weftminfi er- Hall.
A Magnificent Building, which is open to all the
A World, and yet in a manner is flint ups by the

pro-

prodigous concourse of People, who crowd and
fweatto get in or out, and happy are they that
don't leave their Lives, Estates, nor Consciences be-
hind 'em. Here we entred into a great Hall,where
my Indian was furpriz'd to fee, in the fame place,
Men on the one fide with Baubles andToys, and the
other taken up with the Fear of Turdgment,on which
depends their inevitable Destiny.

In this Shop are to be fold Ribbons, Gloves, 7owers
and Commodes, byWord of Mouth ; in another Shop
Lands and Tenements are difpos'd of by Decree. On
your left hand you hear a nimble-tongu'd painted
Sempstress, with her charming Treble invite you to
buy some of her Knick-knacks; and on your right
a deep-mouth'd Cryer commanding Impossibilities,
viz. Silence to be kept amongWomen and Lawyers.
What a fantastical Jargon does this heap ofContra-
rieties amount to ? While our Traveller is making
his Observations upon this motly Scene, he's fright-
ed at the terrible approaches of a multitude of Men
in black Gowns and round Caps,that make betwixt
'em a molt hideous and dreadful Monster call'd Pet-
tyfogging, of which there is such store in England,
that the People think themselves oblig'd to pray for
the Egyptian Locusts and Caterpillars, in exchange
for this kihd of Vermin: And this Monster bellows'
out so pernicious a Language, that one word alone
is sufficient to ruine whole Families.

Here's honest, good-natur'd, modest Mr. S---,
that has done by the Council on the opposite fide,
as the King of France did by the Confederates; and
there a worshipful R- drawing up IndilEments,
with no less than twenty flaws in 'em at a time:
That Breach direds you to a Judge's Favourite fin-
gering the Pence, as if he deferv'd it from his great
knowledg in the Law,rather than his Interest; and
that C-t of J---ce there up in the corner,
points Men of some Characers out to you, that are
for holding out their hands to Plairtiff and Defen;-

danzt.

d.ait. At certain hours appointed, there appears
grave and dauntless Men,wvhofe very fight's enough
to give o'e a tuartan A/gue, and who lay this Mo0.
frer on his back;- scarce a day pases over their heads
but they rescue out of his greedy Jaws some Thou.
sand of Acres half devour'd.

This cursed Pettifogging is much more to be sear'd
than Inizifi/ce itself; the latter openly undoes us,
and awfrds us at least this comfort, That we have
a Right to bewail our selves; bilt the former, by its
dilatory Formalities, rob us of all we have, and tells
us for our eternal Despair, that we susser by Law.

.Tuf.ice, if I may so express my self, is a beautiful
young Virgin difguis'd, brought on the Stage by
the Pleader, purfu'd by the Attorney, cajol'd by the
Counsellor, and defended by the yudgo.'

Some pert Critick will tell me now, that I have
loft my way in Digreflions: Under favour, this
Critick is in the wrong Box, for Digreflions pro-
perly belong to my Subje&, since they are all nothing
but Am.fements; and this is a Truth so utcontefted,
that I am refolv'd to continue 'em.

By way of Digreion I must here inform you, that
inl all those places of my Voyage where the Indian
perplexes me with his Questions, I will drop him,
as I have already done, to pursue my own Reflexions;
upon this Condition however, that I may be allow'd
to take him up again when I'm weary of travelling
alone. I will likewise make bold to quit the Meta-
phor of my Voyage whenever the Fancy takes me;
for I am so far from confining my self like aSlave to
one particular Figure, that I will keep the Power
fill in my hands, to change, if I think fit, at every
Period my Figure, Subjlei, and Stile, that I may be
less tiresome to the modern Reader; for I know
wei: enough, that Variety is the predominant 7afte of
the preflnt Age.

Altho' nothing is durable in this transitory World,
yet 'tis obferv'd that this Saying proves faife ill

Wtefr-

Wiefrl';ier-hall, where there are things of eternag
'ontinuance, as thousands have found true by wofuil
experience, I mean Chancery Suits. Certain Sons of
Parchmenlt, ca!l'd Sollicitors and Barristers, make it.
their whole burilefs to keep the Skuttle-cock in. moo
tion, and v lhen one hand is weary, they play it into
another: 'Tis the chiefeft part of their Religion to
keep up and animate the Differences among .their
Clients; as 'twas with the VTtal Virgins in the days
ofTore, to maintain the sacred Fire. .

'Tis a most furprizing thing, that notwithftand-'
ing all the Clamour, Sqauling, and Bawling there is
in the Courts, yet you. hall have a Judge now and
then take as comfortable a Nap on the Benkch; as if
he were at Church ; and every hoieft Clrillian has
reason to pray, that as often as a.Caufe comes to be
heard, the J--s of ancient times were awake,
and the modernfaft alneep However,this must be
said for 'em,that they are righteous enough in their
Hearts; but the Devil on't, is, that they can't .tell
which way to take to inftruf themselves in the Me-
rits of the Cause: The Contending Parties are fifpe-
ded by 'em, the Sollicitor embroils 'em, the Couifellor
deafens 'em, the Attorney importines 'eni, and the
She-Sollicitor diftrats 'em. Well, let what will hap-
pen on't, give me for my Money the Female Sollicitor'

A certain Judge in the days of Tore made his boatt,
that the most charmi;g TWoman in the TWJorld w7a not able
to make him forget that he vwas a Judge. rery likely,Sir,
aid a Gentleman to him, but £rll lay 71enty to One op
MNture'sfide. The Magift-rae was a Alan before he
was a Judge; the first Motion he finds is for the She-
Sollicitor, and the second is for Jylfricc.

A very beautiful Cowittcfs went to a morose surly
Judge's Chamber, to prepossess him in favour of a
very urrighteous Cause, and to folllcite for a Colonel
asaiift a Tradefinan that sued him: This T'ade/r;m
tlined that very moment. to be in his Lord ship'
Glofet, who fotrid his Cause to be so just and clear;

B. * t'hat

that he could not forbear to promise him to take
care he should carry the Day.

The Words were no sooner oift of his Mouth,but
our charming Countcfs appear'd in the Antichamber.
The Jdge immediately ran as fast as his gouty Legs
would give him leave, to meet her Ladifhip; her
Eyes, Air, and graceful Deportment, the found of 'her
Vioce, so many Charms, in short, pleaded so power-
fully in her favour, that at the first moment he found
the Man too powerful for the ud.ge, and he promi-
fed our Countefsrthat the Colonel hould gain his Cause.
Thus you fee the poor yudge engag'd on bothfides.
When he came back to his Closet, he found the
ra.dcfmnan reduc'd to the lass, Despair. Ifaw her,
cries the Fellow almost out of his Wits; I saw the
Lady that foliicites tgainft me, and, Lord, what a charm-
ing Creatwure fle is! am undone, my Lord, my Cause is
loft and ruin'd. bWly, fays the 5udge, not yet reco-
ver'd from his confusion, imagin your self in my place,
and tell me if'tis pjfible for frail men to refuse any thing
so beautifl, a Lady asks. As he spoke these words, he
pull'd a hundred Pistoles out of his Pocket, which
amounted to the Sum the Tradesman sued for, and
gave 'em to him. By some means or other the Coun-
tefs came to the knowledge of it, and as' he was vir-
tuous even to a scruple, Ihe was afraid of being too
much oblig'd by so generous a Judge, and imme-
diately sent him a hundred Pistoles. The Colonel
full as gallant as the Countefrswas scrupulous, paid
her the Sum aforesaid; and thus every one did as
he ought to do. The Judge was afraid of being un-
jnit, the Countess sear'd to be too much oblig'd, the
Colonel paid, and the Tradesman was satisfied: Or,
according to our old Englifli Adage, all was well;
Jack had Joan, and the Man had his Mare again.

Shall I give you my Opinion of this Judge's Beha-
viour? The firif Motion he found in himself, was
for the charming Sollicitrix, which I cannot excuce
him for the second for J7fyieqc for which I admire
him, While

While I thus amus'd my self, my Traveller was
ioft in a Fog of Black-Gowns; I'll go and find him.
Oh, yonder he is, at the farther end.ofthe Hall; I
call to him, he firives to come to me, but his.Breath
fails him, the Crowd overpreffes him, h's carried
down the Streamn, he swims upon his Elbows to get-
to fliore; at last, half spent, and drippinig from
every Pore in his Body, he comes up to me, and all
the relation I could get from him of what he had
seen, was, Oh, this confounded Country let roget out
of it ajfoon aspoJfiblc, and neversee it more.

Come, come, fays I to him, let's go and refrefli
our selves after this Fatigue 7 and to put the Idea
of the Hall out of our Heads, let's go this Evening
into the delicious Country the Walksi and Places
apart for the Publick Refreshment.

A USE E N T VI.

The WAL , S.
W6 7 E have divers forts of Walks about London, il

some you go to fee and be seen, in others
neither to fee nor be seen, but like a Noun Subftan-
five, to be felt, heard, and underflood.

The Ladies that have an inclination to be private
take delight in the close Walks of Spring Gardcns;
where both Sexes meet, and mutually serve one-
another as Guides to lose their Way; and the wind-
ings and turnings in the little Wildernesses are so
intricate, that the most experienc'd Mothers have
oft loft themselves in looking for their Daughters.

From Spring Garden we set our Faces towards
Hide-Park, where Horses have their Divcrfion as
well as Men, and neigh and court their Miftrefes
almof: in as intelligible a Diale&. Here People
Coach it to take the Air, amidst a Cloud of Dtifl
able to choak a Foot-Soldier, and hinder'd us from

E 2 fee-

feeing thofc that come thither on purpose to fheg
themfcives; i owever, we made hard shift to get
now and then a glance at some of 'em.

Here we saw much to do about nothing, a world
of brave Men, gilt Coaches, and rich Liveries
within some of 'em were upstart Courtiers, blown
up a3 big as Pride and Vanity could swell 'em to, fit-
ting as upright in their Chariots as if a Stake had
been driven thro' 'em: It would hurt their Eyes to
exchainge a glance upon any thing that's vulgarand
that's the reason they are so sparing of their Looks,
that they wvill neither bow nor move their Hats to
avly thing under a Duke or a Dutchess, and yet if you
examih foime of their Originals, a covetous Soul-
less Miser, or a great OppreiTor, laid the Founda-
tion of their Families, and in-their Retinue there'
are more Creditors than Servants.

See, fays my Indian, what a Bevy of gallant Ladies
are in yonder Coaches some are Jfinig, others laugh-
isle othlers ticklin. one-atiotker, and all of 'er toying and
ldevouring Sweetmeats,March-Pane, and China Oranges:
See that Lady, fays he, Was ever any thingfo black as
her Eye, and ro clear as her Forehead ? One would
1v3eail her Face had taken its Tincture from all the
Beauties in Nature, and yet perhaps, anfwer'd I to
hmv Fellow-Traveller, all this is but Imposture; mfl
night, for ought we know, go to Bed last night as
ufgly as a Hag, tho' he now appears like an Angel '
and if vou did but fee this Puppet taken to pieces,
fe's all but Paintt and Plaister.
From hence we went to take a turn in the Mall:
When we came into these pleasant Walks, my Fel-
low-Traveller was ravifl'd at the molt agreeable
Sight in Nature there were none but Women
tihere that day as it hapied, and the Walks were
eover'd with 'em. i never (said he to me laughing)
beheld in my lifre fogreat aflight of Birds; bless me . hor
n.e they are . F'iend,replv'd Ithefe are Birds to amulfe
trie, the* Slja7ge heir fEionhrs two or three times a day.

They

They are Fickle and Light by inclination, Week
by Constitution, but never weary of Billing and
Chirping. They never fee the Day till the Sun ,is
just going to set, hop always upright with one Foot
upon the Gcound, and touch the Clouds with their
proud Toppings. In a word, the generality of Wo-
men are Peacocks when they Walk; Water-Wag-
tailswhen they are within Doors,and Turtles when
they meet Face to Face.

This is a bold Description of them, fays my ndi-
an. Pray tell me, Sir, fays he, is this Portrait of
them after Nature? Yes,withoutQueftion,anfwer'd
I, but I know some Women that are Superior to the
relt of their Sex, and perhaps to Men also. In re-
lation to those, I need not fay much to dilftinguifh
'em,they'l do it by their virtuous Discourse and Des
portment. Nothing is so hard to be Defined as
Women, and of all Women in the World none are
so undefinable as those of London. The Spanifji Wo-
men are altogether Spaniffi, the Italians altogetlher
Italian, the Germans altogether Germans, the French
Women always like themselves; but among the Lon-
don Women we find Spaniards, Italians, Germans, and
French, blended together into one individual Mono-
poly of all Humours and Fashions. Nay, how ma-
ny different Nations are there of our Englifi) Ladies.
In the first place there is the Politick Nation of your,
Ladies of the Town. Next the Savage Nation' of
Country Dames. Then the Free Nation of the Cco
quets. The Invijible Nation of¶the Faithful Wives,
(the worst Peopled of all.) The Good-Natur'd
Nation of \Wives that Cuckold their Husbandst
(they are almost forced to Walk upon ole anothers
Heads, their Numbers are so prodigious.) Tlie
Warlike Nation of Intriguing Ladies. The Feawrfl
Nation of -, but there are scarce any of them
left. The Barbaromw Nation of Mothers-in-Law.
The Haughty Nation of Citizens Wives, -that are
Dignified with a Tile, Th'e Strowling ation of

F~~ it! ~~yO\;V.

your regular Vifitants,and the Lord knows howvman
ny more: not to reckon the Superftitiow Nation that
run after Conjurers and Fortune-Tellers. 'Tis pit-
ty this latter fort are not lock'd up in a Quarter by
thenmflves, and that the Nation of Cunning Women
are not rooted out that abuse them, and set them
upon doing some things which otherwise they would
not.

I have fuffer'd my fclfto be carried too far by my
Subje&. 'Tis a strange thing that we cannot talk
of Women with a just Moderation: We either talk
too much, or too little of them: We don't speak e-
nough of VertuoM Women, and we speak too much,
of those that are not so. /Men would do Justice to
'em all, if they could talk of them without Paflion;
but they scarce speak at all of those that are Indiffe-
rent: They are prepoffeifed for themthey Love, and
againfl them by whom they cannotmake themselves
to be Beloved. They rank the latter in the Class
of I'rrcguziar Women, because they are Wife,and in-
deed Wiser than they would have them be. The
Railing of the Men ought to be the Justification. of
the Women ; but it unluckily falls out, that one
half of the World take delight to raise Scandalous
Stories, and t'other half in believing them. Slan-
der has been the Produt of. all Times,and all Coun-
tries; it is very ilear of a; Ancient standing in the
World, as Vertue. Defamation ought to be more
feveresl pu:i.h'd than Theft. It does more Injury
to Civil Socieries, and 'tis a harder matter to secure
one's Reputa.icn from a Slanderer, than one's Mo-
nev from a Rebb.,r. All theWorldare agreed,that
both one and the other are Scoundrels, yet fol' all
that we efreem'em whenthey excel in this Art. A
Nice and a Witty Railer is the most agreeable Per-
son in Conversation; and he that Dextroufly picks
another Mlan's Pocket,as your Quacks and Attornies,
draws the Veneration evenofthofewholiveby Cut-
ting of Purses. When one obfervesin whatRepurta

tion

tionboth of them live, one would be apt to fay,
That 'tis neither Defamation, nor Robbery, that
we blame in others; but only their Awkardncfs and
want of Skill. They are punifii'd for not being a-
ble to arrive at the Perfedion of their Art.

Come, come, fays my Indian, you ramble from
your Subje&; you speak of Back-biting in.General,
whereas at present we are only talking of, that
Branch of it which belongs to \omnen. I would
bring you back to that Point, which puts me in the
nind of certain Laws, which was heretofore pro-
posed by a Legislator ofmy Country. One ofthefe
Laws gave permillion for one Woman to Slander a-
nother; in the first place, because it is impoJfible to
prevent it; and betides, because in Matters of Gallan-
try, ihe that accuses her Neighbour, might her self
be accused of it in her turn,purfuant to the Ancient
and Righteous Law of returning a Rorland for an
Oliver. But how would you have a Woman quit
Scores with a Man, who has publifl'd difadvanta-
gious Stories of her ? Mutc ihe serve him in the fame
kind ? By all means; For if Men think it a piece
of Merit to Conquer Women, and Women place
theirs in well defending themifelves, she that gets a
Lover lings a Triumph ; and she that Loves, consef-
fes her self to be Conquer'd. If it were true, that
the Ladies were more Weak than we are, their Fall
would be more excusable; but I think we are Wea-
ker than our Wives, since we expe& they lhould
pardonus, and not we them. One would think that
when a Man had got a Woman into a Matrimonial
Noose, 'twas enough for her to be wholly his: And
by the fame Reason flould not the Man be wholly
hers ? What a Tyranny is this in the Men, to moo.
nopoli7e Infidelity to themselves ?

But if Men will be slandering Women, let them
vent their Fury against those only that are ugly, for
that is neither Slandering nor Calumniating, tho' it
be a Crime the Ladies will never forgive, for the get

E,* lerality

rality of them are more Jealous of the Reputatiop
of th'eirBeauties, than of their Honours, and 'te
that wants a whole Moriling at least to bring her
Face to perfe&ion, would be more concern'd to be
tirpriz'd at her oilet,than to be taken in the Arms
of a Gallant.

I am not at all furpriz'd at this Notion, for the
chief Vertue in the La'dies'Catechifm is, to please;
and Beauty pleases Men more effetually than Wis-
dom. 'One Man'loves Sweetness and Modesty in a
Woman; another loves a Jolly Damnsel iWith Life
and Vigour, but Agreeableness and Beauty Relishes
with all Humane Pallats. AYoung Wcman who
has no other Portion than her hopes of Pleasing, is
at a lots what Measures to take that the may make
her Fortune. Is the Simple ? we despise her: Is she
Virtuousu we don't like her Company. Is she a Co-
quet? we avoid her: therefore to succeed well in the
World,' tis neceflary that (he be' Virtuous, Simple,
and a Coquet all at once.' Simplicity Invites us,
Coquetry Amuses, and Vertue Retains us.' 'Tis a
hard matter for a WVoman to escape the Censures of,
the Men.- 'Tis much more so to guard themselves
fiom the Womens Tongues. A Lady thatfetsup
Virtue, makes her self envied ; she that pretends
to Gallantry, makes her self despised; but fne that
pretends to nothing, escapes Contempt 'and Envy;
and saves her felfbetween two Reputatioifs. " This
M.anagament furpafes the Capacity of a youngWo-
man,'fhe being exposed to two Temptations: To
pr-efen-e thenmfelves from' them,they want the Affi-
rance of Reason; and 'tis their -Misfortune that
Reason comes not in to their Relief,till their Youth
and Beauty and the Danger is gone toge'heir. Tell
us why nflould not Reason come as-fooln as Beauty,
inuce one was made to defend the other?' It does
not depeldt upon a Woman to be Handioni; the on-
ly Beauty .hat all 'of them might have, 'and some of
tiem, to fireaskmodealy, often part with, is Gisit,';

;
b. - - ub

bnt ofall Beauties whatfevere,'tis the eaieft to lose.
She that never was yet in Love, is so alham'd of her
first Weakness, that Ihe would by all means conceal
it from her self: As for the second, flie desires to
conceal it from others; but fle does not think it
worth the while to conceal the third from anybody.
When Chastity is once gone, 'tis no more to be re-
triev'd than Youth. Those that have loft their
ChaRities, aflumes an affied one, which is muci
sooner provoked than that which is real: Of which
we had an Experiment in the Close Walk at the
Head of Rofamona's Pond, where for one poor Equi-
vecalWord,a Brisk She was ready to tear a Gentle-
man's Cravat off; who, after a further Parley, dif-
cover'd her self to be sensible of some things which
she ought to have been ignorant of, for Modefry fake.
A Lady of this Chara&cr was fitting on the fide of
this Pond upon the Grass, with her Younger Sifter
newly come out of the Country, to whom a Spark
fitting, by, entertain'd her with a Relation of an A.
morons-Adventure between my Lord - and my
Lady Love it; butexpreffing himfelfinfuch Obscene
ambiguous terms, thata Woman that did not know
What was What, could as soon ly with a Hundred
Weight of Lead at her Heels, as tell what to make
of it: The more obscurely the Gentleman told his
Story,the more attentively did our young Creature
liftcn to it, and difcover'd her Curiosity by some
fi:nple harmless Questions. The Elder of the two
Sifters desirous to let the Gentleman, and others
that fate by them, undcrftand that fihe had more
.Modetty than her Younger Siller, cry'di out, Ohfie,
S.fter fie ; can you ecar ficch a wicked Stroir- this with-
out BluflJiig ? Alass, S er,fays the Young I nnocency,
I don'tyet know what it is to Blujh, or what it isyoul mearn
y It!.
TheGentleman soon took the Flint, and whi-
fpering the elder Sifter in the Ear, (he immediately
lrads Home the Young Ignorant Creatv'e by her
: ..., .. .... :- -'
:.
' F' "'oc

Foct-man, and Trip'd away Hand in- Hand with
the Gentleman. Her cunning Management, fllew'd
her an Experienc'd Coquet, who obferv'd a fort of
Decorum,, to uffer in a greater Liberty.

Every thing is managed in good Order,by a Wo.
man that knows ier Company, and understands her
Buafiefs. He that loses his Money out'ofComplai.
lance, yields place to him who lends the Lady his
Coach to take the Air in. The Young Heir begins
where the Ruined Cully ended. He that pays for
the Collation, is succeeded by another that eats it;
and when my Lord comes in at the Gate, poor Sir
John must Scamper out at the Window.

The Green Walk afforded us variety ofDifcour.
fes from Persons of both Sexes. Here walk'da Beau
Brre-headed by a Company .of the Common Proref-
flon in Difhabilie, and Nlight-DrefTes; either tor
want of Day Cloaths, or to flew they were ready
for Business. Here walk'd a French Fop with both
his Hands in his Pockets, carrying all his Pleated
Coat bel-re to flew his Silk Breeches. There were
a Cluster of Senators talking of State Affairs, and
the Price of Corn, and Cattle, and were difturb'd
with the Noisy Milk Folks, crying, A Can of Milk,
Ladies ; a Can of Red Cors Milk, Sir. Here were a
Beavy of Buckfom Laifes complaining of the Decay
of Trade, and Monopolies; and there Vertuous
Women Railing against Whores, tieir Husbands,
and Coquetry.

And now being weary of Walking so long, we
reposed our selves upon one of the Benches, and
digesting several Dialogues between the Modest
Ladies and Coquets, made thisObfervation, That
tho' the Coquets were difpifed by the generality of
Ltdies, yet they imitate them to a Hairs Breadth
in their whole Condu&. They learn of them the
Wfinning Ail; the Bewitching Glance, the Amorous
Smirk, and the Sullen Pout. They Talk, and Dress,
and Patcb like them: They mult-needs go down

the Stream. It is the Coquets that Invent the New
Modes and Expressions; every thing is done for
them, and by them; tho' with all these Advanta-
ges,there's a vast difference between 'em; the Repu-
tation of Virtuous WVomen is solid, that of Coq!rets is
more extended. But I am fenfhble I have made too
long a flay in this part of my Voyage; a Man al-
ways amuses himself longer with the Women than
he is willing. Well, lince we are here, let's fllew
.our Lidian the Horfe-Guards, the Country of Gal-
lantry. In our Way thither was nothing worth
our Observation, unless 'twas the Bird-Cage, inha-
bited by Wild-Fowl; the Ducks begging Charity,
the Black-Guard Boys robbing their own Bellies to
relieve them, and an EngliJh Dog-kennel Translated
into a French Eating-houfe.

GAL L ANTR T.
t ET's enter this Brave Country, and fee
J But what is there to be seen here ? Gallantry
and Bravery, which was formerly so well Cultiva-
ted, so flourishing and frequented by many Persons
of Honour, is at present Desolate, Unmanur'd, and
IAbandoned ! What a Desert 'tis become! Alas, I
can fee nothing at all in it but a Disbanded Sol-
dier mounted upon a Pedestal, standing Centinel
over the Ducks and Wild-Geefe, and to prevent an
Invasion by O-- 's SpanifJ Pilgrims, or Webfier's
Darcinm.
1ljWy, fays my Indian, is thae a Soldier ? He bas ne'er
a Srord, and is NIked.

I flippofe, reply'd I to the Indian, since the Peace
he has Pawn'd his Sword to buy him Food; and for
his being Naked, who regards it ? What signifies a
Soldier in Time of Peace ? Pish ! A Soldier Naked,
is that such a Wonder ? What are they good for
elSe but Hanging or Starving, when we have no
occasion for themias has 1,ee learnedly determined

by

by the Author of that Original Amusement, Arg
.mnrMts .gtini a Standing Army.

DOur God and Soldier wc lie Ad.rce
yus. at tl: Br'ink of Danger, not before;
Aifjer Delivcraw.cc, tcy're alike requited,
Our Gad's Forgottcin and our Soldier's Slighted:
Comnle, this is a lLancholyCountry, let's leave amnfire
errfcl vcs about Gallantry awid Bravery, and all at wce,
like . fca tha.t have MIthing to Do, nor nothing to Have,
take a Tr'ip nto the Land of AMarriage, and fee Who and
W1;ho arc together : Butfirfk, What are those Soldiers de
ir ? Ti cy look like Brave Fellows.

They are (fays I) drawn up ,tO Prayers, and
would be brave Men indeed, if they were l;alf as
good at Praying and Fighting, as they are at Cur.
,ing a:d Sn'earfing.

AM-uSTEMENT VII.

R
A R R I A G E.
T IS a difficult Task to speak so of Marriage, as

to please all People. Those who are not
Noos'd in the Snare, will thank me for giving a Co-
.-ical Description of it. The Grand Pox eat this
Buffoon, fays the Serious Wary Husband; if he was
in my Place, he would have no more Temptation
to Laugh, than to Break his Neck. If I moralize
gravelyupon the Inconveniences of Matrimony,
those that have a Longing to enter into that Ho-
nourable State, will complain that I diffwade them
fiom so charming a Condition. How then fliall I
brder my Discourse ? For I am in great Perplexity
a·oult 1..

A certain Painter made a Picure of Hymen for a
yoouin Lover. I would have him drawn, fays this

* '* ' '" ' '
'
' '' ' ' 'Pauloaat$

Pafionate Gentleman, rwith all the Graxes your utmofi
Skill can bestow vpon him: Above all, remrmber that
Hymen ought to be more Beautiful than Adonis: 1ToA
rl;t put into his Hands a Flarrbeau more Brillant thats
that of Love. I Jhort, give him all the Charms that
your Imaginatign and Colours can bk'forw. I wil!pay yolu
foryour Pidture, according s Ifind you ife my Friend,
Hymen. The Painter w-ho was well acquainted
with his GenerousTem.per, wa.s not wanting, you.
maybe fure,to answer his Expe&a.tions, a nd.brou hgl
him Home the Piece the Eveningbefore he was ilar-
tied. Our young Lover was not at all satisfied witil
it. This Figure, fays he, rianrs a certain Gay Air, it.
h n6aone of those Charms and Agreements. Asyois
bavc Painted him,he makes but a very indiffcrcnt Appea-
nance, and therefore youjhall be but indifferently paid.
The Painter, who had as much Presence of Mind,
ias Skill in his Profefflion, took a Resolution wvlhat to
do that very Moment: Tou are in the right on't, Sir,
said he, to find fault with my PiEture, it is not yet dry .
T is Face is Soak'd, and to dealfreely with you, the C -
lours Ilrfc in Painting don't appear worth a Fartirg as.
firs. Iwrillbrigyou this Table some Mgonths. hence,
and then you allpay me,as youfind it pleares you: .
am confidentit will appear quite another thing then. Sir,
your Humble Servant,I have no oecalion for Money.

The Painter carried his Piece Home; our young
Lover was Married the next Day,and some Months
went over his Head before the Painter appear'd.
At last he bringsthePiaure with him, andour young
Husband was furpriz'd when he saw it. Ton promis'd
fays he, that time ?wou'd mend your Pictr'e, arid you are
,uagood asyour Word. Lord, what a difference there i '
If wear I scarce know it nowD I fee it agai., I admire
to fee what a fltrnge cfctr asew :fvonths have had vpo0n
yowr Colours ; but I admire yoz;r Irnem; nzlmuch more.
However, Sir, I misut take the freedom to te.' you, Tiar
it my Opinion his Looks arefomewbat ofi ;'e G VC fl, hefo
Eyes are tea Bilsk and Liviily . Tosn to de!t pgsfla

th you, the Fires of Hymen ought not to be altogether
so bri gh as those of Love; for his is a Solid but Heavy
ire. Befdes, the Difpoition ofyour Figure isfome-
what too Free, and Chearful, and you havegiven him a
certaisn Ad,- oflyantonnefs, which, let me tellyou, Sir,
does; nt at all fit well upon ..... In fiort, this is
none of hymen.

P;ry well, Sir, said the Painter, what I foresaw is
now come to pars. Hymen at present is not so beautiful
in yrur Idea, as in my Piclure. The Cafe is mightily al.
tc 'd from what it was three Months ago. '77s not my
Piclure, but your Imagination that is changed.: ou were
a Lover then, but now a Husband.

Iunderfiand you very well, fays the Husband in-
terrupting him, Let m drop that Matter. Tour Pifgure
now pleases, and here is more Money for it thanyou could
reasonably have e.xpefed. By no means, fays the Pain-
ter, yot m:frt excuse me there; but I will giveyou ano-
ther Pictrure, wherein by certain Optick Rules and Per-
fpeclives, itfliall befo contrived, as itJhall please both the
Lovers and the Husbands : and perform'd it accord-
ingly, placing it at the end of a Long Gallery, upon a
kind of an Alcove ; and to come to this Alcove, one must
firfr pass over a very Slippery Step. On this ide of it was
the Critical Place where the Piece look'd so Lovely and
Delicious; but asfoon as you were gone beyond it,it made
A mojf lamentable Figure.

If you underfand how difficult a thing it is to
paint Matrimony to the Gust of alt People, pray sus-
pend your Censure here, I am going to Present my
Pi&ure, chufe what Light yon please to view it in.
To comeback to my Travelling Stile,I must tell you
at first dash, that Marriage is a Country that Peo-
ples all others: The Commonalty are more fruitful
there than the Nobility,the reason of which perhaps
is, That the Nobility take move delight to Ramble
Abroad, than flay at Home. Marriage has this pe-
culiar Property annext to it, that it can alter the
Humours of those that are fetled in it. It frequent'

ly

ily transforms a Jolly Fellow into a Mecr Sot, it of-
ten melts down a Beau into an errant Sloven and
lon the other Hand it so happens fometilres, that a
Wtrritn Virtuous W\oman will improve a Dull Heavy
Country Booby into a Man of Sence and Gallantry.

People marry for different Motives: Some are
lead by Portion, and others by Reason; the former
without knowing what they are. going to do, and
kili. latter knowing no more,but that the thing mufi:

|i:' done. There are Men in the World so weary of
,Q!iet and Indolence,that they marry only to divert
ithenifelves. In the firiE place the Choice of a Wo-
man employs them for some time: Then Visits and
Interviews, Feasts and Ceremonies; but after the
1last Ceremony is over, they are more Tired and
Weary than ever. How many Hundred Married
Couples do we fee, who from the second Year of
their coming together, have nothing more in Com-
mon than their Names, their Quality, their Ill Hu-
mour and their Misery. I don't wonder there are
so many Unhappy Matches, since Folks marry ra-
ther wholly ps their own Heads, or wholly by those
of others. A Man that marries of his own Head,
not feeing that in his Spouse which all the World
fees in her, is in danger of feeing much more in her,
than others ever did.

Another that has not Courage enough to trust his.
own Judgment, fairly applies himself to the next
Match-Maker in the Neighbourhood, who knows to
a rittie the exa& Rates of the Market, and the Cur--
rent Price of Young Women that are fit to Marry.
These Marriage-Huckters, or Wife-Brokers, have an
admirable Talent to fort Conditions, Families,
Trades,and Efiates: In ihort, every thing toge-
ther,except Humours and Inclinations,about which
they never trouble themselves. By the Procure-
mentofthefe experienc'd Matrons, a Marriage is
struck up like a Smithfield Bargain: There is much
ligling and Tr'anging for t'other Ten Pound. Ont.

iide

fide endeavours to rais'e,nd the other to beat down
the Miarket Price. At laft,after a World of Words
spent to fine purpose, they come to a Conclusion.

Others that have no time to Truck and Bargain
so, go immediately to a Scrivenerbs, to find outa
Rich Jfidow, as they go to the Office of Intelligence
to hearken out a Service. It is not altogether the
Match-makers Fault, if you are deceived in your
Woman. She gives you an account of her Portion
to a Farthing: You examine nothing but the Arti-
cles relating to the Family and the Fortune ; the Wo-
man is left in the Margin of the Inventory, and you
find her too much at long run.

After all that I have said, I ani not afraid so ad-
Vance this PropoftioR; that 'tis pcljiblefor tbofe that
Marry to be Happy. But you must call it Trucking
or Bartering, and not Marrying, to take a Woman
raeerly for her Fortune, and reckon her Perfe&ions
by the Number of Pounds Ihe is like to bring with
lier. Nor is it to Marry but to Please one's ielf, to
choose a Wife as we do a 7Tlip,meerly for her Beau-
ty. It is not to Marry, but to Dodt at a certain
Age, to take a Tor;lT IT oman only for the fake of her
Company. What is it then to be Marry'd ? Why,
'tis to choose with Circumfpe&ion, and Delibera-
tion, by Inclination, and not bylntereft,fich a Wo.
lhan as will chafe vou after the fame manner.

Betides other things in common with all the
World, the Country of Marriage has this Particular
to it seif; That Strangers have a desire to Settle
there,ant the Natural Inhabitants wou'd be Ba-
niifhd out of it with all their Hearts. A Man may
,e Banifli'd out of his Country by certain things
call'd Sepcretion; but the true way of getting out of
it is by Widowhood, and is much to be preferred
before Separation; for the Separated are Savage A:
liimals, uncapable of the prettiest Ties of Society.
The usual Causes of Separation is atign'd as the
Fault of the Wife, but often the Husband is the oc-

cafion

jafion that the Wife is in the Fault.; and he hinmfelf
is a Fool to proclaim to the World that his Wife has
made a false Step.

Itwillbe expe&ed now,that I speak a few. Words
of Widowhood. ,'Tis a Copious and Fertile Sub-
jeC that's certain: but a Man may burn his Fingers
by medling with it. For if I describe thei but as
little concern'd for the Death of their Husbands, I
ihall offend the Rules of Decency and good Manners,
and ifI exaggerate their Afflicions, I shall. offend
the Truth. Whatever our Railers pretend to the
contrary, I-fay, there's no Widowhood without a
sprinkling ofSorrowin it.. Is itnot a very Sorrow-
fiul Condition to be obliged to Counterfeit a perpe-
tual Sorrow? A very Doleful Part this; that a
Widow must play, who would not give the World.
occafionto Talk of her. There are some Widows
in the World so mightilybefriendedby Providence,
thattheir Sighs'and Tears cost them notiing. I
know one f a contrary Temper to this, vho did
honestly all thatin her lay to afflia her self; but Na-
ture it seems had denied her the Gift oft of Tears.
She defir'd to raifethe Compaffionof her Husband's
Relations, for her All depended on them.

One Day her Brother-in-Law, who lamented ex-'
Feedingly, reproach'd her for not having ihed one
Tear. Alas, reply'd the Widow to hin, my Poor
Heart is so over-whelm'd with this unexpected Ca-
lamity, that am as.it werebecome insensible by it.
Great Sorrows are.not felt at first; but I am sure
mine will Kill me in the End. i know very wellI
faidher Brother-in-Law to her,that Griefstoo. great
don't make themselves at first to be perceived; and
I know as well, that Violent Griefs don't continue
long. Thus,, Madam, you will be ftrangelv fury
pliz'd, that the Grief of your Widowhood will be
past before you are aware.

Another Widow was reduced to the last pitch of
Defl)air,nor was it without a very Sorrowful Oc-

F Caiirn:

Occation. She had loft upon the fame Day the BeJf
Husband, and the Prettiest little Lap-Dog in London.
This double Widowhood had brought her to so
low a Condition, that het Friends were afraid of
her Life. They durst not speak to her of Eating
and Drinking; nay, they durst not so much as osier
to Comfort her. 'Tis a dangerous Matter, you
know, to combat a Woman's Grief. The best way
is to let Time and their Natural Inconstancy work
it off However to accustom our Widdowby little
and little to support the Idea of her Two Loi'es,
a Good Friend spoke to her first of her Litde Dog.
At the bare Name of Dony, there was such a Howl-
ing and Crying, such Tearing of Hair, and Beating
ofBreafts; in short, ifch a Noise, and such a So-
ther, that one would have thought Heaven and
Earth had been coming together: At last she faint-
ed away. Well, fays this Prudent Friend of hers,
God be prais'd,lwas so happy as notto mention her
Husband to her, for then she had certainly Died up-
on the Spot. The next Day the Name of Dony set
her Tears a running in so great plenty, that it was
!oped the Spring would stop of it self, and the a-
bove-mentioned Zealous Friend thought she might
now venture to adminfter Come confblation to her.
Alas, fays she, if the bare Name of Dony gives you
so much Affli'ion, what might we not fear from
you, ihould we talk to you of your Dear Husband .
But God forbid I thould do that. Ab Poor Dony.'
To be Mow'd down thus in the Flower of Youth
and Beauty! Well, Madam, you'll never have such
another pretty Creature again, But'tis happy for
the Dog that he's Dead, for you cou'd never have
Lov'd him longer that's certain.' Is it pofiible for a
Woman to love any thing after she has loft her Hus-
band ? After this manner it was that this Difcreer
Gentlewomanvery dexterously mingled the Idea of
the Husband with that of Dony, well knowing that
as two Shoulders of Mutton drive down one ano-

ther

thei, so two powerful Griefs deitroy ore ianotheri
by making a Diversion. She observed that at the
Name of Dony her Tears redubbl'di which flopt
Ihort at the Name of Husband : It was without que-
Ilion, a fort of a Qualm. Every body knows that
Tears are a Tribute we owe, and only pay to ordi-
nary Griefs. However it was, our poor affliied.
Widow pawsed several Days and Nights in this fad
Alternative of Weeping for her Dog, and Lament-
ing her Husband. At last her Good Friend enqui-
red all over the Town for a Pretty Dog; and it was
her good Luck to light upon one mnuch Finer and
Prettier than Dony of happy emory, and presented
it to our Widow, who burf into a ftefli Stream of
Tears as {he accepted it. This Beautifil NeW-
comerfo strangely insinuated himself into her good
Affe&ions, that within Eight Days he had got the
Ascendant of her Heart, and Dbnj Was no iorei
thought of, than if he had-never had a Being there,
Observe now. what a Consequence our Widows
Friend drew from it. If a New Dog has put a stop
to her Tears, perhaps a Neew Husband will have the
fame Operation upon her Qualms. But, alas, the
one was not to be so easily effeced as the other.The
New Dog so Play'd his Cards, that he effaced the
memory of his PredeceWors in Eight days; btit it
was above nree long tedious Months before our
Widow could be brought to take a New Huts-
band into her Bed. ' Now tho' I left iny seif full po-
wer to drop my Indian Traveller as often as I saw
convenient, yet I have no intention to lose himn
out of my Sight sos I'have occasion for him to Au-
thorife certain Odd Fances that colie into my
Head, while I pass from the Country of Marriage,
where we lose our Liberties, into that of Gaming,
where we lose our Erates.

. .
.~~~~~~~~~~

Amuse-

A M U E-
S , E N T VIII.

CGaing-Horfes.
A M I N G is an Eftateto which all the World
I,· has a Pretence, tho' few espouse it that are
willing lo keep either their ftatesor Reputations.
. knew two Mviddlefex Sharpers not long ago, that
liherited a Weft-Country Gentleman's Estate,
who, I believe, wou'd have never made them his
Heirs in his last Will and Testament.

Lantril!oo is a kind of a Republick very ill orde-
red,where all the World are Hail Fellow well met;
no. diftintion of Ranks,no Subordination observed.
The greatest Scoundrel of the Town, with Money
in his Pockets, flall take his Turn before the best
'Duke or Peer in the Land,is the Cards are on his fide;.
From these Privileg'd-Places not only all'Refpe&
and Inferiority is Banilh'd; but every thing that
looks like Good Manners, Companion,' or Humani-
ty: Their Hearts are so Hard and Obdurate, that
what occasions the Grief of one Man; gives Joy and
Satisfation to his next Neighbour.

The Gkrcians met together in former Times, to
fee their Gladiators Ihew their Valour, that is, to
Slafli and Kill one another and this they call-
ed Sport ? What a Cursed Barbarity was this ? But
are we a Jot inferiour to them in this refpe&,. who
Chrilten all the Disorders of Lansquenet by the Name
of Gaming .or, to use the Gamesters own Expr.eil-
on where a Parcel of Sharks meet, To Bite one ano-
thers Heads iss.

It happened one Day, that my Traveller dropt
into a Chocolate-Houfe in Covent-Garden, where
they wvere at this noble Recreation; He was won-
derfully fPCrprized at tle Odnefs of the Sight. Set

O'u~

.ur felfnow in the room of a Superstitious Indian,
who knows nothingofour Customs at Play, and
you will agree that his Notions, as Abftrated and
V.isionary as they may seem, have some Founda-
tions in Truth. Iprefent you here with his own
Expreflions as I found them set down in a Letter
which he fknt into his own Country.

7The Fragments of An Indian Letter.
tHE Englijl pretend that they Worfllip but one
T God, but for my Part, I don't believe what
they fay: For besides several. Living Divinities, to
which we may fee them daily offer their Vows,they
have several other Inanimate ones to whom they
pay Sacrifices, as I have observed at one of their
Publick Meetings, where I happened once to be.

In this Place there is a great Altar to be seen,
builtroundand covered with aGreen Waclcm,lightt-
ed in the midft,and encompanfed by feveralPerfons,
in a fitting Posture, as we do at our Domeftick Sa.
orifices. At thevery moment I came into the Room,
one of those, who I supposed was the Priest, spread
upon the Altar certain Leaves which he took out of
a little Book that he held in his Hand. Upon these
Leaves were represented certain Figures very aw-
kardly painted; however, they must needs be the I-
mages of some Divinities, for,in proportion as they
were diflributed round, each one of the Assistants
made an Offering to it, greater or less, according to
his Devotion. I observed that these Offerings were.
nore conliderable than thofe.they make in their o-
ther Temples.

After the aforesaid Ceremony is over, the Priest
lays his Hand in a trembling manner, as it were,
upon the reft of the Book, and continues sometime
in this posture seiz'd with Fear, and without any
Acdion at all: All the reft of the Company atten-
}iv9 to what he does, are in Sufpence -all the while,

F a an4

and unmoveable Assistants are all of them in their
turn polfefc by different Agitations, according to
the Spirit which happens to seize them: One joins
his Hands together,and Blekfes Heaveen, another very
earnestly looking upon his Image, Grinds his Teeth, a
third Bites his Fingers, and samps upon the Ground
with Jis Feet.. Every one of them, in short, make
such extraordinary Postures and Contortions, that
they seem to be no longer Rational Creatures. But
scarce has the Priest returned a certain Leaf, but he
is likewise seiz'd by the fame Fury with the ret.
He tears the Book, and devours it in his Rage, throws
4owt2 the Altar, and Curses the Sacriice. Nothing
now is to be heard but Complaints and Groans, Cries,
and Imprecations. Seeing them foTranfported,and
ifoFurious, I judge that the God they Worship is a
Jealous Deity, who to Punilh them for what they
Sacrifice to others, fends to each of them an Evil
Dwmon to Poflefs him.

I have thus-fhewed you what Judgment an Indian
would be apt to pass upontheTranfports he findsin
our Gamefiers. What wou'd he not have thought
then if he had seen any of our Gaming Ladies there ?
'Tis certain that Love it self, as extravagant as it
is, never occafion'd so many Disorders among the
Women, as the unaccountable Madness of Gamitg,
How come they to abandon themselves thus to a
Pallion that discomposes their Minds,their Healths,
their Beauty, that Ruines- What was I going
to fay? But this Picture does not lhew them Ad-
vantage, let us draw a Curtain over it.

In some Places they-call Gaming-Houfes Acade-
mies ; but I know not why they should inherit that
Honourable Name,fince there's nothingto belearn'd
there,unlefs it be Slight of Hand,which is sometimes
at the Expcnce of all our Money, to get that of
other Mens by Fraud and Cunning. The Persons
that meet are generally Men of an Infamoru Chara-
aer,and are in variousShapes,Habits,aAd Employ-

ments-

knents. Sometimes they areSquires ofthe Pad,and
now and then borrow a little Moneyuponthe King's
High-Way, to recruit their Lofles at the Gaming-
H-ouse, and when a Hue and Cry is out, to appre-
hend them,they are as safe in one ofthefe Houses as
a Priest at the Altar, and pra&ise the old Trade of
Crofs-biting Cullies, afliftingthe Frailfquare Dye with
high and low Fullums, and other- Napping Tricks, in
comparison of whom the common Bulkers, and
Pick-Pockets are a very honeit Society. How unac-
countable is this way to Beggary, that when a Man
has but a little Money, and knows not where in the
World to compass any more, unless by hazarding
his Neck for't,will try an Experiment to leave hims
self none at all: Or, he that has Money of his own,
fiould play the Fool, and try whether it Ihall not be
another Man's. Was ever any thing so Nonfen-
fically Pleasant ? One idle day I ventur'd into one
of thee Gaming-Hoiufes, where I found an Oglioof
Rakes of several Humours, and Conditions met to-
gether. Some that had left them never a Penny to
bless their Heads with. One that had play'd a-
way even his Shirt and Cravat, and all his Clothes
but his Breeches, stood hfivering in a Corner of the
Room,and another comforting him, and faying,
Damme Jack,who ever thought to fee thee in a State
of Innocency: Cheer up, Nakedness is the best Re-
ceipt in the World againit a Fever; and then fell a
Ranting, as if Hell had broke loose that very Mo-
ment. What the Devil have we here to do, fays
my Indian, doe's it Rain Oaths and Curses in this
Country ? I fee Gamesters are Shipwrackt before
they come to understand their Danger, and lose
their Clothes before they have paid their Taylors.
They should go to School in my Country to learn
Sobriety and Vertue. I told him, instead of Academ
mies, there Places should be call'd Cheating-Houfes:
Whereupon a Bully of the Blade came ftritting up
to my very Iofe, in fuqh a Fury, that I would wil-

F 4 lingly

lingly have given half the Teeth in my Head for a
Composition, crying out, Split my Wind-pipe, Sir,
you are a Fool,and don't undertandiTrap,the whole
World's a Cheat.

The Play-House cheats you of your time, and the
Tradefinen of yourMoney,without giving you either
Sense or Reason for't. The Attorney picks your
Pocket, and gives you Law for't ; the Whore picks
your Purse, and gives you the Pox for't; and thp
Port picks your Pocket,and gives you nothing for't.
Lovers cozen you with their Eyes, Orators with their
T,.grcs, the Valiant with their Arms, Fidlers with
their Fingers, Surgeons with Wooden Legs, and Cour-
tiers and Songsters empty your Pockets, and give yoa
_reath and Air for it: And why should not we Re-.
cruit by the fame Methods that have Ruin'd us.

Our Friends, continued he,gives us good Advice'
and would fain draw us offfrom the Course we are
in, but all to no purpose: We ask them what they
would have us do ? Money we have none, and with-
out it there is no Living: Should we flay till it were
brought, or come alone ? How would you have a
poor Individuumr Fagum live, that has neither E-
state, Office, Mastei, nor Friend to maintain him,
and is quite out of his Element, unless he be either
in a Tavern, a Ba-dy-Hozfe, or a Gaming-Ordinary ?
;No, we are the Men, fays he, that Providence has
appointed to live by our Wits, and will not want
while there is Money above Ground. Happy Mai;
ratch; a. Mackcril. Let the worst come to th'Worft,
a 'iry Mouth on the Tripple Tree puts an end to
ail Discourse about us. From the Gaming-Houfe
we took our Walk through the Streets,and the first
Amnufmentswe Encountred, were the Variety and
contradicory Language of the Signs, enough to
pcrflade a Man there were no Rules of Concord a-
mong the Citizens. Here we saw Yofeph's Dreamn,
the Bull and Mouth, the Hen and Razor, the Ax and
Bottle, the [hale and Crwp, the Shov.and Boot, the

Leg

.eg and Star, the Bible and Swan, the Frying-Pan alnd
Drum, the Lute and Tun, the Hog in Armour, and a
thousand others that the wife Men that put them
there can give no Reason for.

Here walk'd a Fellow with a long white Rod on
his Shoulder,that'saflam'd to cry his Trade,though
he gets his Living by it; another bawling out todd's
Four Volumes in Print, which a Man in Reading. of,
wou'd wonder that so much Vnom fliould not tear
him to pieces,but that some of the ancient Moral ifts
have observed, that the Rankest Poyfon may be kept
in an Asses Hoofs or a Fool's Bosom. Some fay, the
first Word he spoke was Rascal, and that if he lives
to have Children, they will all speak the fame Dia-
led, and have a Natural Antipathy to Eggs, because
their Father was palted with hundreds of 'em
when he was dignified on the Pillory.

Other Amufcmentsprefented themfelvesas thick
as Hops, as Moses Pi&ur'd with Horns on his Head,
to keep Cheapfide in Countenance. The Sign of the
Three Nuns very dismally Painted; to keep up young
Women's'Antipathy to Popery and Maidel-heads.
Here fate a Fellow felling little Balls to take the
Stains out of the Citizens Wives Petticoats, that
should have been as big as Foot-Bags, if applied to
that purpose. Under that Bulk was a Projedor
clicking of his Svimming Girdles, to keep up Mer-
chants Credits from finking. A pretty Engine to
preserve Bankers and Insurers from Breaking, and
prevent publishing it in the Gazette, when they are
Broke, that they will pay all their Debts as far as
it may fIand with their Convenience. Inthat Shop
was an indebted Lord talking of his Honour, and a
Tradesman of his Honefly,things that every lan has
and every thing is, in some Disguise or other, but
duly confider'd, that are scarce any flich things ia
the World, unless among Pawn-Brokers, Stock-
Jobbers, and Horfe-Courfers; so that the Lord and
Tradesman were discoursing about nothing; and fig-

nified

nified no more, than the Parson's Preaching against
CoJvetoufncfs to the Maim'd,Blind,and superannuated
Soldiers in Chelfea-College, nor Dr. Sahmon'sprefcrib.
ing Cow-Heels to a Married Couple, as a congluti.
nating Aliment. But there the Weaver had the A-
fcendant of the Dollor.

As we pass'd along, I could not forbear looking
into some of the Shops to fee how the Owners im-
ployed themfelvesin the Absence of Cuftomers,and
in a Barber's Shop I saw a Beau so overladen with
Wig, that there was no difference between his
Head and the Wooden one that flood in the Win-
dow. The Fop it seems, was newly come to his
Estate, though not to the years of Discretion, and
was singing the Song, Happy is the Child whose Father
isgone to the Devil; and the Barber all the while
keeping time on his Cittern; for you know a Cit,
tern and a Barber is as natural as Milk to a Calf,or
the Bears to be attended by a Bagpiper.

In the Scrivener's Shop I saw a company of Spart
that were felling their Wives and their Portions,
and purchafingAnnuities; and old Ten-in-the-hun.
tred Fathers damning themselves to raise their Po.
fterities. In the Tobacconists Shops Men were
sneezing and fpauling, as if they were all clapt, and
under a Salivation for the cure on't: They that
fmoak'd it, were persecuting others to follow their
Example ; and they that fnuff'd it up in pouder,
were drawing on themselves the Incommodities of
Old-age, in the perpetual Annoyance of Rheum and
Drivel.

Pursuing my Voyage thro' the City, and caffing
a leer into the Shops of the rich Drapers, M'ercers,
and Lacemen, I saw them haunted by many People
iw Want, especially young Heirs newly at age, and
Spendthrifts, that came to borrow Money of 'em.
Alas, said the Traders, Times are dead, and little
Money firring; all we can do, is to furnifi you with
Wh/bt the Shop affords, and if a Hundred Pound or two

;n Commodities will do you any good, they are t yourfr
vice. These the Gallants take up at'ani exceflive
rate, to fell immediately for what they can get, and
the Trader has his Friend to take 'em off under-
hand at a third part of the value, by way of helping
Men in distress. These are they that inveagle un-
thinking Animals into all forts of extravagant Ex-
pences, and ruine 'em insensibly, under colour of
Kindness and Credit; for they let every thing at
double the value, and if you keep not touch at the
Day, your Persons are imprifon'd, your Goods sei-
Led, and your Estates extended; and they that
help'd to make you Princes before, are now the for-
ward'ft to put you in the condition of Beggars.

Among other Amusements, let us speak a word or
two of Lombard-fireet, where Luxury seems to carry
us to Peru, where you behold their Magazines, In-
gots of Gold and Silver as big as Pigs of Lead; and
your Ladies, after they have travel'd thither with
some liberal Interloper, carry home with 'em more
than their Hsbands are worth, and drag at their
long Tails the whole substance of a Herd of Credi.
tors. Here are Jewels and Pearls, Rubies and Dia-
i monds, Broad-pieces, Guineas, Lewis d'Or's, Crown

pieces, and Dollars without number: Nay, in some
oftheirShops is nothing to be seen or fold but great
heaps of Money, that would tempt a Man to think
the whole Indies were emptied into one tingle Shop,
'tis so full of Gold and Silver; and yet it often haps
pens, that he who is pofieft of this vast Treasure is
not worth a Brass Farthing; to day his Compters
bend under the weight of Cafl, and to morrow the
Shop is shut up, and you hear no more of our Gold-
smith, till you find him in a Gazetie, tore to pieces
by a Statute of Bankrupt, and he and his Creditors
made a Prey by a parcel of devouring Vermin calrd
Commi/fioners.

The neighbouring Country isStocks-marktt,wller
$to fee a large Garden pav'd with Pebble Stones in al}

lhe.

the Beds and Alleys, indifferently open to all come/i
and goers, and yet bears as good Herbs, Fruits and
Flowers as aly in the World: Here is Winter dreft
in the Livery of Summer every Day a Crop is ga.
ther'd, and every Night are ftock'd up in Baskets
till the next day's Sun does open'em.

About this Garden great numbers of Nymphs re:
fide, who each of'em live in their refpe&ive Tubs
they have not only that in common with Diogenes,
but, like that Philosopher also, they speak out free,
ly to the first comer whatever comes uppermot. A
turtller Dtfcription I would give you of their Parts
and Persons, only I cannot endure the smell of the
Scrieants at the Counter-gate, who stink worse than
Ai.f fratida, and would poyfon the Country, if thi
pleafint Garden was not an Antidote againIt their
InfeEion: And therefore I'll go back again into thp
Csotnry of

COFFE E-HO V SE S.
x 'V Here beingarriv'd, I'm i a Wood, therd

are so many of'em, I know not which to
enter: Stay, let me fee, where the Sign is painted
- ith a t Woman's Hand in't,'tis aBawdyhoufe; where
a MAan's, it has another Qualification; but where it
has a Star in the Sign, 'tis calculated for every lewd
purpose.

Every Coffeehouse is illuminated both without
and within doors; without by a fine glass Lantern,
and within by a Woman so light and splendid, you
nay fee thro' her without the help of a Pelfpe&ive.
At the Bar the good Man always places a charming
Phb;lis or two,who invite you by their amorous glan-
ces into their fmoakyTerritories,to the loss of your
Sight. This is the place where several Knights Er-
rant come to feat themselves at the fame Table,
-yithout knowing one-another, and yet talk as fa-
miliarly together as if they had been of many Years

** ** * - * * . * ' -
^~ac

acquailtance: They have scarce look'd about 'em,
when a certain Liquor as black as Soot is handed to
'em, which being foppishly fum'd into their Noses,
Eyes, and Ears, has the vertne to make 'em talk
and prattle together of every thing but what they
flould do: Now they tell their several Adventures
by Sea and Land; how they conquer'd the Gyant,
were overcome by the Lady, and bought a pair,.of
wax'd Boots at Northampton to go a wooing in. One
was commending his Wife, another his Horse, and
the third said he had the beftfmoak'd Beef in Chri-
fiendom. Some were discoursing of all forts of Go-
vernment, Monarchical, Ariftocratical, and Democra-
tical; some about the Choice of Mayors, Sheriffs and
Aldermen ; and others, of the tranfcendant Vertues
of Vinegar, Pepper and Mustard. In lhort, I thought
the whole Room was a perfec resemblance of Dover-
Coirrt,where all/peak, but no-body heard or anfwer'd.

To the Charms of Coffee the wiser fort joyn'd Sp;-
rit of Clary, Vfquebaugh, and Brandy, which com-
pleatly enchants the Knights: By the force of there
| Soporiferorm Enchantments you Ihall find one snoring
j heartily on a Bench, another makes Love to beauti-
ful Philis at the Bar, and the third, as valiant as Or-
lando Furioso, goes to signalize his Valour in scour-
ing the Streets.

I Ihould never have done, if I should attempt to
run thro' all the several Countries within the Walls
of London, as the Long Robe, the Sword, the Treasury.
Every State, in brief, is like a separate Country by
it self, and has its particular Manners and Gibbe-
rifl. Here you may view the fruitful Country of
Trade, that has turn'd Leather Breeches into Gold
Chains,blue Aprons into Fur-gowns,a Kitchinltuff-
tub into a gilded Chariot,a Drayman into a Knight,
and NoblemensPalaces into Shops and Warehouses.
Here is also the barren Country of the Philosopher's
Stone, inhabited by none but Cheats in the Opera-
tion, Beggars in the C.oncluion, and now is become-.

al-

almost defolate,till another Age of Fools and Knavei
do People it. To this may be added the cold Country
of the Newsmongers, that report more than they
hear, affirm more than they know, and swear more
than they believe, who rob one-another, and lie in
Sheets for want of a Covcrlid. The hot Country of the
Disputers, that quarrel and raise a Dust about no.
thing. The level Country of bad Poets and Presbyte.
rian Parsons, one of which is maintain'd by a good
frock of Confidence, and the other by Flattery and
Canting. The defart uninhabited Country of Virtuor
Vomen. The Conquer'd Country of Coquets, and an in-
finite number of others; not to reckon the Los
Country inhabited by Strollers, who aim at nothing
but to lead others out of their way: They are of
eafie access, but 'tis dangerous to traffick with 'em.
Some of 'em have the Art to please without Ma-
nagement, and to love without Loving.

But how have I forgot my own dear Country, that
is consecrated to Bacchs, that abounds with INeRar,
the Wonder-working Liquor of the World, that
makes a Poet a Prince in his own conceit, a Coward
valiant, and a Beggar as rich as an Alderman. Here
I live at ease, and in Plenty, swagger and carouse,
quarrel with the Maftir, fight the Drawer, and ne'er
trouble my self about paying the Reckoning, for one
Fool or other pays it for me: A Poet that has Wit
in his Head, never carries Money in his Breeches,
for fear of creating a new Amufemenrt

In Leicefterfields I saw aMountebank on the Stage,
with a Congregation of Fools about him, who, like
a Mailer in the Faculty of Lying, gave 'em a Hilfto
ty of his Cures, beyond all the Plays and Farces in
the World: He told 'em of fifteen Persons that
were run clear thro'the Body, and glad to carry
their Puddings in their hands for a matter of three
days together, but in four and twenty hours he
made 'em as whole as Filhes,'and not so much as a
Scar for the remembrance of the Orifice. If a Man

had

had been so bold as toaskhim when and where' his
Answer would have been ready without fludying,
That it was some Twelve hundred Leagues off, in
Terra incognita, by the token, that at the fame time
he was Physician in Ordinary to a great Prince who
died about five and twenty Years ago; and yet the
0tack was not forty.

All these SubjeEs, tho' very amusing, were not
equally edifying; and therefore in my Voyage to-
wards the City I call'd in at a Quaker's Aleeting,
where a Fellow was talking Nonfence as confidently
as if he had got a Patent for it, and confirm'd the
Popish Maxim, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devo-
tion. The Women were the oddest Creatures in the
World, neither Fish nor Flelh, but like Frogs, only
their lower parts were Man'sm eat.

From thence I fail'd into a Presbyterian Meeting
near Covent-garden,where the vociferous Holderforth
was as bold and fawcy as if the Deity and all Man-
kind had ow'd him Money: He was flewing the
way to be rich when Taxes rife and Trading falls, and
descanting upon all Humors and Manners: He
(fays the Tubfter) that would be rich according to the
JPraflice of this wicked Age, must play the Thief or the
Cheat; he that would rife in the World, mlft turn Para-
site or Projecor ; he that marries, ventures fir the
Horn, either before or afterwards: There is no Valour
like Swearing, uiarreling, or HeEtoring: If you are
poor, no body owns you; if rich, you'll know no body : If
you die young, what pity 'twas, they'llfay, that he jbould
be cut off in his prime ? If old, he was e'en past his belt,
there's nogreat miss of him: If you are Religiotn, and
frequent Meetings, the World will fay you are a Hypo-
crite: And ifyougo to Church, and don't make a liberal
Contribution to w, wefayyou are a Papist. To which
I make bold to add, if you are gay and pleasant,
you pass for a Buffoon; and if pensive and referv'd,
you are taken to be four and censorious. Courtefie
is call'd Collouing and Currying Favour; down-

right

right Honesty and Plain-dealing is interpreted to
be Pride and Illmanners. And so I took my leave
of Dr. -, and peep'd into a fine Church in my way
to Flect-ftrectr where a huge double-belly'd DoEtor
was so full of his DoubtlefJes, that he left no room
for one grain of Sccpticifm, and made me so perfet
a Dogmatift,that I made these innocent Reflelions:
The Dr. does not love butter'd Buns, Doubtless, he
is glad that his first Lady Wife is under ground, he
married again within two months after her death;
Doubtless, he is carnally inclin'd, he has got his fe-
cond Wife with Child; Doubtless, a Man of his fan-
guine appearance had no body to help him: He is
very fat, Doubtless he is rich; he looks very grunt
and surly, Doubtless he is not the beft-hunlor'd Man
in the World. But I soon gave over these Rerarksi
for being a Stranger to his Worlhip, Doubtless I
might have been sometimes in the right, and Doubt-
less I flould sometimes havebeen in the wrong; and
therefore I remov'd my Corps to another Church in
my Road to London.

Here, before Sermon began, the Clark (in a flitt
Stick contriv'd for that purpose) handed up to the
Desk a number of Prayer-bills, containing the hum-
ble Petitions of divers Devotee's, for a supply of
what they wanted, and the removal of their Affli-
etions. One was a Bill from a Courtier, that having
a good Polt, defir'd he might keep it for his Life,
without being call'd to account for Negleit or Mif-
management; and, that he might continue God's
Servant in Ordinary, and the King's Special Favou-
rite. A young Virgin, apprehensive of her Wants
and Weaknelfes, being about to enter into the holy
frate of Matrimony, pray'd for proportionable Gifts
and Graces, tO enable her for such an Vnder-Taking.

Some pray'd for good Matches for their Daugle;
ters, and good Offices for their Sons; others beg'd
Children for themselves; and flre the Husband
that allows his Wife to ask Children abroad, will

be

him.

Now came abundance of Bills from such as were
going Voyages to Sea, and others that were taking
long Journeys by Land; both Praying for the Gift
of Chafity for their Wives, and Fidelity for theii
Prcntices, till they should return again. Then the
Bills of Complaint coming in thick and threefold
HumblyJflieing, that many Citizens Wives had hard
Hearts, Undutiful Husbands, and Disobedient Chil-
dren, which they heartily Pray'd to be quit of; i
difcharg'd my Ears from their Attendance on so Me-
lancholy a Subjet, and employe.d my Eyes on the
variety of Diverting Faces ia the Gallery.

Where you might fee in one Pew,a.Coveyof Hand-
some, Buckfotre, Bona Roba's, withHigh Heads,and
all the Mundw Mvuliebris of Ornament and Dress a-
bout them, as Merry as Hawks in a Mlew, as Airy as
their Fanns, and as Light as a Bcaux Head, or his
Feather.

In another Peir was a Nest of such Hard-favour'd
She's, that you would have blest your self. Some
with their Faces so Pounced and Speckled,as if they
had been Scarrified, and newly pass'd the Cupping-
G(lass with a World of little Plaiiters, Largc,RounAd,
Square, and briefly cut out into such variety, that it
would have posed a good ilathemKtician to have
found out another Figure. They employ'dthem-
selves while the Bills were readinlg, about-- Huflh
hufll.

The [Wou'd be BliJop is beginning, and 'tis a sign of
a Clorn, as well as an Atheist, Lzdere cum Sanitis;
for tho' I expose the Foppery of Perfons,.I have a
great Veneration for Holy Offices. Our Dofor, i
6.rant it, has some of the Qualifications of an.All-
Souls Candidate, Bene TreJ/fti d Aediocriter Dofi ;
aJld in good carneft fills a Pulpit very well ; but
that he so often hauls in his Common-Place Book by
icck and Shoulders,that he cloys his Auditors with

G thlat

8I
.Coifee-1)oures;

that unpalatable Ragouft, call'd in Latin Cranmbti
Bii/oct tre, and in plain Englifh,Tivice-boil'd Cabbage;
for having in every'Harangue, let the Subjet be
what ic will, Marlhal'd his Discourse by the help of
the W.riike Jofephus,and by the Afiftance of the Learn-
ed Grotius, and Piow Dr. Hammond oulr own Country
man, puziled Aquinas, confuted Bellarmin, and Baffled
Origen, pass we on ( fays he ) to the next thing a con-
fide;-able.

The C!Lrk is such an AffeCted C. C. C--, that
lhe Sings out of Tune, repeat's out of Order, and
does nothing as he should do: For infteadof faying,
Ai^iehe Screams out A Main,which had like to put
mne into a Confounded Fit of Laughter; for a Spark
who had been over-night at 7 or i I, falling asleep
in the Church, and being waked by the Noise of A
lfain, he frarts up, and cries out aloud, I'll Setyou
Half a Croin.

Crowding to get out to breath my Spleen at this
Adventure, I put the Bilk upon a Pick-Pocket; who
maeafiring my Estate by the Length and Bulkiness
of my New 1Wlig, which (God knows ) is not paid for,
he made a Dive into my Pocket, but encountring a
Disappoin!tment, Rub'd off, Cursing the Vacuum;
and I as heartily laughing at his Folly, that could
think a Poet ever went to Church when he had Mo-
ney to go to a Tavern. Poets are better Principl'd
than to hoard up 7r;-s.; and could they as well
secure themselves from the FleflJ and the Devil, as
they do frnm the World,there would not be a Hairs
breadth 'twixt them and Heaven. This Pains-ta-
ker of a Divine has sometime since, I hear, been ob-
liz'd to his kind Parilhioners, for letting him make
a fire Cure of his care of Souls, by pulling down
that Church he gave such instances of preternatu-
ral endowments in, and have rebuilt it to pull it dolva
again, or one of the Church Wardens does not'talk
so much like an Apothecary as he's reported to do,
the t'other takes as musIh care, of other Peoples AMo'

sleyi

iey, as hedoesof.his own. But talk is but talk, and
the Gentlemen of theVcfiry would never flew
their own Ieads to be heavier than their Bodies,
by Building a greater Superifrudurc to that of the
Church, than its Foundations will bear: Tho' gU-
K- , to be sure knows more of the matter than
Sir Chrifloper Wren, and the Booksellers thereabouts
will have more than sufficient amends made for the
Cost they will be at in Beautifying the Dr's Church
and Pulpit, would his Reverence oblige 'em with
the.Copies of his elaborate Sermons.

Afterfo learn'da difcourfe,Icould digest nothing
nnder the D- of St. P-, and over went to the
Temple Church, but who hould be a layingl down
new Schemes of Church-Government but W- K-
D. D. he had learn'd to Flatter Arch-Bishops and
bther Great Men, fromthis Pedantick Tranflatioii
of Pliny's.fulfoi Panegyrick, and was drainrr forth:
his Words at full length, in order to draw himself
into some Church Preferment, tho' in my opinion,
it was very improper, that a Man that had written
contrary to the Canons of the Church, and the mu-
nicipal Laws of the Kingdom, ihould be Pcrch'd up"
in a Pulpit to give Inltruftions to those Gentlemen
whose Abilitieswould be too hard for his Igno-
rance. But Dr. Atterbiry has handled him ivith
that dexterity, as to have occasion for no one else to
expose his weaknefs,and if he mulf have other Pre-
ferment before he flings him upon his Back,he may
reft contented with his Arch-Deaconry and Curacy.
Now I crofs'd the way to a Bookfrllers, in hopes to
get a Dinner and a Bottle, but the stingy Curr popt
me off with a Dish of Coffee, and the old Talk, that
Trading was Dead,that they fuiier'd for other Menu
Works as well as their own ; and in ihort, finding
not a Penny t& be fcrew'd out of the Prig, I pursued
my Voyage'td the City; but it happening to Raia"
to lielter my self from it, I run my pace. into

A

A Heralds Office.
TIE RE vws a Confounded Noise of Descents,

*Peigrees, Genealogies, Coats of Arms, Eear-
i::?, Additions, Abatements, and a deal of that in-
iilnilica!it Jargon. While I was listening to this
G.hbei;-;'b, in coimcs a Fellow with a Roll of Parch-
menct ini his H.! nd to be made a Gentleman, and to
lhave Coat ofArms finely Painted to hang up in
his D>;-l'icm till his Wife Died, and then to be
tranfp~rtedl on th:e Outiide and Front of the House,
to [iiLvc a Rich Widow to Marry him.

_y.1 r:t -r, fals he, has bore Arms for his Majesty
in nr.anv Honourable Occasions of Watching and
if`.--i, i and has made many a Tall Fellow speak to
the Conrtai'e at all HFours of the Night. My Vncle
wa.s the irf Mian that ever was of the Honourable
O:-^;- oFthe fi!Tck-Gttard: And we have had five
P'r.aic Conmm:inders of our Family, by my Father's
iide, that have served the State in the Quality of
i..i-Jals iM/e;, andl 77h-ief-Taers, and gave his Ma-
jcit a air Aiccoult of1ill the Prisoners that were ta-
ken by ri!em : And by my Alfothers fide, it will not
be denicd, but that I am Honourably Descended;
for nl vfi-f:dmos't;er was never without a dof.enlChal-
ber-.Maids ad ur 'cs in Family. Her Husband
wore a S;word by his Place, for he was Deputy-AMar-
f'.d; and to prove nmy felfa Man of Honour, I have
here aTe1fim-onia in my Hand,in Black and White;
and ii mn Pocket brave Yellow-Boys, to pay for a
Ca.t of Arms: Which being produced and Fin-
gcr'd by the Herald, he immediately aiign'd him a
CGatJ, v'. A Gibbet erec, with a Wing volant, a
Lad:ker aTceidant, a Rope Pendant, and a Marfal's
,a^, Sw inin;,; at the end on't.

I ani SEa _
Ialized, fays my Indiwa, at your Custom

in
__ _· Y

in Londonvii makingevery Satcy ack a Gentleman.
And why are you not as well offended, reply'd I tt
my Indian,to hear almost every Gentleman call one a-
notheryack, 7Tom, and Harry. They firll dropt
the Diftinllion lproper to Men of Qlalitya nd Scoun-
drels took it up and bellowed it upon tliemifclvcs;
and hence it is, that a Gentl.emni is funk into plainl
ack, and yack is rais'd into Gcntlcman.
In Days of 'orea Man of Honour was more Diftin-
guilhable by his Generofityand AfFability, than by his
Lac'd Liveries ; but too many of them having dege-
nerated into the Vices of the Vulgar Fry, Honour
is grown Contemptible, the RefpIef that is due to
their Births is loft in a Savage Alanagement, and is
now afiumed by every Scoundrel.

The Cobler is Affronted, if you don't call him
Mr. Translator ; the Groom names hlimfelfGemtlc-
rna of the Horse, and the Fellow that carries Guts to
the Bears, writes him self one of His M'aje sy's Officers.
The Page calls himfelfa Child of Honcur, and tl.e
Foot-boy stiles himfelfmy Ladics Pagc. Every Lit-
tie NaJfy Whore takes upon her the Title of Lady,
and every Impudent Broken-nmoutb"'d lA;teau-'maker,
must be call'd Madam Tcodofia Br-. Every Dun!ce
of a Quack is call'd a Phyjician. Every Gown-Maan
a Counfeller. Everyfilly I-uff a Ca;ptin. Evcry Giy
tliing a Chevalier. Every Parifi Reader,a 1)oFtcr:
And every Whriting Clerk in the Office,Mr. Secretary:
Which is all but IIypocrilie and Knavery in Dif-.
guise; for nothing is now called by its right amns.
The Heralds I fee have but little to do,Honour and
Arms which used to employ all Men of Birth and
Parts, now almofl dwindled into an Airy Nothing :
Let us then go and fee how the World wags in the
City Circle.

Amunif-

A M u s E MI E N T IX.

The City Circle.
I Have given myTraveller Walking enough from

Country to Country, let us save him the Troui
ble now of Beating the Hoof, and Ihew him the reft
of thi World as he fits -in his Chair.

To he acquainted with all the Different Chara-
cter. of it, it willbe sufficient for him to frequent
certain Numerous Aflemblies,a fort of a City Circle,
they are £et up in imitation of the Circle at Court.

The Circle in Foreign Courts is a Grave Assem-
bly, but ii ilfatcd, upon low Stools set in a Round.
Here al! Women Talk, and none of them Liften.
Here they make a Potherabout nothing. Here tiey
Decide all thingsand their molt diversified Conver-
fatincis are a fort of Roundelays, that end either in
Artificial Slanders, or gross Flattery, but this be-
ing in no wife applicable to the Englif Court,I Ihall
wave a further Description ofit, and come to.

TZe City Ladies VTfting-iday.
WjT7 Hich is a familiar Aflembly, or a general

Council of the fair and charming Sex,where
all the important Afairs of their Neighbours are
largely discuss'd, but judg'd in an arbitrary man-
ner, without hearing the Parties speak for them-
selves. Nothing comes amiss to these Tribunals;
matters of high and no consequence, as Religion and
COckoldom, Commides and Sermons, Politicks and Gal-
L.itrry, Reccipts of Cookery and Scandal, Coquettry and
Prcfcrvwg, iltin- and Laundry ;in short, every
thing is fubjcc& to the Jurifdi&tion of this Court,
and no Appeal lies from it. The Coach stops at the
Goidfinith's or Arcer's Door, and off leaps Mr. Skip-

.- - **~kenewl

4ennel from behind it; and makes his Address to the
Book-keeper or Prentice, and asks if his Lady (for
that is always the Name of the Mistress) receives
any Visits that day or no: Some tfay nuft be made
till the Woman above Stairs fends down her An-
fwer, and then the Pink ofCourtefie is receiv'd at
the top of the Stairs, like King James by the French
King, and handed to her Stpol of Difcourfc.

My dear Lady, 'tis an Honour to give me your Com-
pany after so obliging a manner, is the firj word that
drops from her the Visit is paid tqg,and IJilJou!d never
have forgiven that uneafiefs of Mind which mvfi hav'e
been the consequence of it, had I any longer forbore payieg
my Refpets to ;, v dear Lady Tattle, is of course tile
Answer to it. Lord, Madam ! did you hear the LNews
of the misfortune that besel Mrs.fuch a one's Huwband ?
ever believe uMe again, if that old filthy Sot fiwe was mar-
ried to for the fake of his /ioney, has not had a Statzute
of Bankrupt taken out against him but Alderman Vani-
ty's Lady had the mofi insupportable Accident that befcl
her, which it's pofible to think of: Let me never go a
'viJting again, if her Coach did not overturn jift against
the Royal Exchange, in full Change time, and cxpos'd '
what her Ladiflip had, afoul Smock and a dirty Skin, to
the whole Company. I could never have outliv'd the Dif-
grace, nor have fifer'd myself to be seen in publick, b!t
herLadiJhip is of another fort of Conmplexion, than [carry
about me. Ifuppofeyou are no Stranger to her makig a
Bedfellow of that filthy Fellow her Groom, or the Conver-
fation Mr, Alderman turn'd away his Coachman for:
But Heavens forbid Ijfould expose her, &c..

Thus they take a tip of 7ea, then for a draught or
two of Scandal to digest it, next let it be Ratrfia or
any other Favourite Liquor, Scandal must be the as-
ter draught, to make it fit eafie on their Stomach,
till the half-hour's past, and they have disburthen'd
thenmfelves of their Secrets, and take Coach for
some other place, to cohllet new matter for Desai
!lationb

' 0 4. A.

A venerable old Gentlewoman, call'd Madain
iWhimfJy, whose Relations are difpers'd into all cor-
ners of the Earth, is Preiident of this Board; fle is
lineally descended from the Maggots of the South, an
illustrious and ancient Family, that were a Branch
of the Wag-tails of the Etft, who boast themselves
descended in a right Line from Madam Eve. . Here
are to be found as many different Opinions as there
are Heads in the Room. The fame Judge is some-
times severe, and sometimes indulgent, sometimes
grave, and fonletimes trifling, and they talk examc
ly there as I do in my Amusements.

They pass in a moment from the most serious to
the mos comical Strain; from the greatest things
to the fimalleft, from a Duke to a Chimney-fweeper,
from a Council of War to a Chriftning; and some-
tinmes c iidden Reflection upon a Wonans Head-
dress hinders the decilion of a Cafe of Conscience un-
der Examination.

In thisCountry twenty several Sentences are pro-
nounc'd all at once. The Men vote when they can,
the Women as often as they please; they have two
Votes for one: The great Liberty that is allow'd in
the City Circle invites all forts of Persons to come
thither to fee an.d befcen; every one talks according
to his Defigns-inlination and Genits; the young folks
talk of what they are now doing, the old Fellows
talk of what they have done in the Days of Queen
Dick, and your Sots and Coxcombs of what they
have a delign to do, tho' they never go about it.

The Ambitious rail at the Sluggards, as a compa-
ny of idle Fellows, that take up room in theWorld
and do nothing ? The Sluggards return back the
Compliment to the Ambitious, That they trouble all
the 'World mith their Plots, to advance themselves and
rzine others. The Tradesman curses War. from the
bottom of his Heart, as that which spoils Com-
merce, depopulates Countries, and destroys Man-

kind

Hind; and the Soldier withes those who had a hand
in making the Peace were at the Devil.

The Vertuofr despises the Rich for making such a
bustle about so fooflih and pale-fac'daMetal asGold.
The Rich laugh at Learning and learned Men, and
cry, A Fig for Aristotle and Des Curtes. Your Men
of Gravity and WVifdom rail at Love, as the most
foolish and impertinent Trifle in the World ; and
the Lover fattens himself with his own Fancies, and
laughs at Wisdom as a four and revere thing, that
is not worth the pursuit. 'Those who are Unmar-
ried fall upon the jealous-pated Husbands, as Men
that create their own Troubles ; and those who are
married juftifie their own prudent Condu&l in en-
deavouring to prevent their own Diflonour.

A young forward Puppy full of vigor and health,
feem'd to intimate by his Difcourfe,i;hat he thought
himself immortal: Well, fays he, I have drank my
gallon of Claret cv;ry night these Seven Years, and yet
the devil of a Fvcer, er any other Disease, dare attack
me, tho' I alpays keep two or three Sins going at once:
Before George, Ithink our Family's made qs Io, ; there
is that old Prig my Father (a Plague on hm) turn'd of
Seventy, and yet he's as found as a Reach f i ; he'll ride
you Forty mile outright at a Fox Chace; Small-Beer be
my Portion here and hereafter, if I believe he'll ever
have thegood manners to troop of. A grave old Gen-
tleman, offended at this rude and frothy Discourse,
gave his Whiskers a twirl, and thus reprimanded
our fawcy Whippersnapper: Know Boy, crys he to
him in an angry tone, know Sirrab, that every Age
fiands upon the fame level as to the duration of Life ; a
Man of Fourscore isyoung enough to live, and an Infant
but of Four Days birth is old enough to die. I appreend
your meaning, old Gentleman, fays our young Prig to
him, well enough ; You are young enough to live to days
and old enough to die to morrow.

Those whom you have hitherto heard, talk'd on-
Iy to let the Company fee what they we're the reft,

both

both in their Conversation and Manners, appear'd
direcly contrary to what they were.

You admire the gay noifie Impertinence of that
Country Wit yonder, who tells so manypleafant
Stories, and sets all the Company laughing. Don't
be mistaken in him, he's the dulles Rogue alive, if
you trip hinm of what he has plunder'd from others.
All his Jests and Repartees he purloin'd from his
F.ither'iC Chplain; they are the effect of his Memory,
and not of his Invention.

That other Spark there sets up for a Wit, and has
sone Sence to't. Pray mind that Worshipful Lump
of Clay, that inanimate Figure who lolls in the
Elbow-Chair, he takes no manner of notice of what
is said in the Company: By his plodding, ftarch'd
solemn Looks you would conclude that Business of
Importance and Affairs of State took up all his
Thoughts, and that his Head was brim-full of Di-
_ratc.es, Negociations, Decrees, Orders of Council, and
the Lord knows what. I'll tell you what, he's the
emptieft,dulleft, fhalloweft Mbnfter within the Bills
of Mortality ; he's equally incapable of Business and
Pleasure; he'll take you a Nap over a Game at
Cards, and yawn and stretch at the most diverting
Comedy nay, under the Pulpit, when the Parson
has preach'd all the Dogs out o'th' Church: He
dreams as he walks, and the Sot, when he's asleep,
differs from the Sot when awake, as a Ninepin does
when 'tis up, from a Ninep;n down. He has a con-
fiderable polt in the Government, and a pretty
Wife, and minds 'em both alike 'tis pity he has
not a Deputy to officiatefor him.

That Toung Creature there by the Window, at the
bare mention of the word Love, starts and trembles
as if a Demi-C!lverin were ihot off at her Ear: Her
virtuous Mother has told her fuchterrible Stories
about it, that the poor Fool believes Ihe hates it. And
do you think, Sir, she'll hate it to the end of the
Chapter ? That's so ncertain, I dare not engage

for,

for it; a Woman who hates Love before. he knows
what it is, is not in danger to hate it very long.

Perhaps I explain things after a freer manner
than I ought, and unmask too many Faces. in my
Circle, but if I were never so much inclin'd to spare
'em, and they themselves had Address enough to
conceal their own DefeEs, I fee a Lady coming into
the Room, who will decipher 'emn more unmerci-
fully than I can. Now she has feated her self, ob-
serve what a modest Air Ihe has, how critically The
draws off her Gloves, how artfully The manages her
Fan; and if she lift up her Byes, 'tis only to fee
whether other Women are as handfom and modest
as her self; she has so much Virtue, the World fays,
that she can't endure any that have a less Share on't
than her self: What is harder still, those that have
more Virtue than she, do equally displease her. 'Tis
for this reason The spares no-body.

I ask'd a Lady of the fame Charaeer t'other day,
how it came to pass that her Exhortations were
half Godlinef and half Slander: Bless me ! cries the,
Slander ! wat mean you by the Wod ? 'Tis cnough to
give one the Spleen, or an Ague Fit. The truth on't i,
Iam sometimes oblig'd to. accommodate my self to the
Taste of the World, to eafon my Remnonfirances with a
little Satyr, for the World expets rae liould make every
thing agreeable, even Connexion itself: We miJftfome-
times give a littleflip from Morality, to bring in a few
flrokes of Satyr. Speak more honefily, Madam, fays I
to her, and confess, that you bring in one Jfroke of Mo-
rality to countenance the making of a thoufandfcandalous
Refletions. -

Very wrell, replies the Indian to me, Ifind the Lon-
doners are as comical in their Garbs as asseted in their
Discourses; they iWould think themselves diflonour'd to
appear in a Suit they wore last Tear : According to the
Rule of Faflions, thi furious Beau the next Tear mufit
make but afcvrvy Figure ; but Ipardon them for follor-
ing the Custom of their Country: Iputfo ill a ConfJrueti-
. , . . .
* or.

piv upon their Curiosity, I will not hereafter judge of the
Hearts of Wiomien by the steps Ifee them make.

Asfor that Beau yonder, I have agreat Curiosity to
kiWP) whether his Inflde answers his Outside not a Word
has dropt from him asyet, but surely the Oracle will open
.ano. The Ladies that encompass him,faid I to my
Curious Traveller, are as impatient to hear him
talk as you can be; therefore let us liften. They
all compliment and address their Discourses to him.
What Answers does he make'em? Sometimes Yes,
sometimes No, and sometimes Nothing at all. He
speaks to one with his Eyes, to another with his
Head, and laughs at a third with so mysterious an
Air. that'tis believ'd there is something extraordi-
nary meant by it. All the Company are ofopinion
that he has Wit in abundance; his Physiognomy
talks, his Air perfwades, but all his Eloquence lies
in the fine Outside he makes; and as soon as the Spark
has fnew'd himself, he has concluded his Speech. 'Tis
-i thousand pities that Nature had notTime enough
to finiih her Workmanfbip: Had she beftow'd ne-
ver so little Wit upon an Outside, so prepofleffing
us in hisFavour, the idlest Tales from his Mouth
would have pass'd for the most ingenious Story in
the World.'

But our Ladies now begin to be weary of holding
a longer Discourse with their Idol; all of 'em re,
folv'd,'if they maut speak, to speak with somebody
that' will answer 'cm again, and not with a Starue.
Our Beau retires into the next Chamber, intent on
nothing but how to display his Charms to the belt
advantage: He is at firit view enamour'd with a,
pretty Lady,'whom he saw in the Room ; he beiie-
ges her with his Eyes he ogles at her, he prims and
plumes himself, and at last boards her.

This Lady is very teferv'd, and tho' our Gentle-
man appear very charming to her, the is not fur-
priz'd at the first fight of him; 'tis nothing but her
Curiosity which nmakes her hazard meeting him in

the

the Field ; with this Intention she lifiens to what
our Adventurer has to fay. In short, this was the
ficcefs of his Affair with her: He found himself
mightily at a loss how to cope with this Lady; ihe
had an inexhaustible Source of Wit, and would not
be paid with gracious Nods and Smiles, but as we
fee there are a hundred witty Women in the World,
that are not difpleas'd with a fair Outside; our
confident Spark flatter'd himself, that if he could
but once perfwade the Lady he was in love with
her, the Garrison would immediately surrender.
To effet this,,he imploy'd the finest Turns of Elo-
quence, and the molt touching Exprefions of the
mute Language, but this fair Lady made as if file
did not understand him: What flould he now do
to explain himself more learly to her ? He had a
Diamond Ring of a considerable value upon his Fin-
ger, and found himself put to't to contrive a piece
of Gallantry a la mde to present it to her: Thus
playing with his Hand, and holding it so that he
might shew his Diamond more advantageously to the
Eyes of the Fair Indifferent, he plays with it; flle
turns her Head firit oh one fide, then on the other.
This Vnconcernednefi mortified him extreamly, yet
Itill he kept on his Shew, which is always the last
Refuge of a Coxcomb: He is aitonifh'd to find a
Woman Insensible to such a Beau as hirmfelf, and fuck
a Diamond as his was; but this made no Impression
on the Lady.

At the very Moment he defpair'd of his Enter-
prize, this Cruel, this Insensible seiz'd him hastily?
by the Hand, to look nearer at the Diamond, from
which she first turn'd her Eyes: What a Bleffd turn
ofthp Scene was this to a Pejec¢ed Lover ! He reaf-
fumes his Courage, and to make a Declaration of
his Paflion for once and all, he takes the Ring from
his Finger, and after a Thousand Cringes and Gri-
irccs, Presents her with it. The Lady takes it ir
her Hand, and holds it close to her Eyes, to view it

! nlo1e

nore carefully, redoubles his Hope and AfTurance,
.ncd thought he had a Right to Kifs the Hand that
:. d received his Diamond. The Lady was so taken

*i- :n looking at it, that she was not at leisure to
. -:-
: :,: ei,:g angry at this Freedom; but on the

::.:'i-.led, and without any more Ceremony
U r'T'; :: r
- .. .Ion her Finger.
- n --. is; rat our Lover thinks himself secure of
Fr: -v.:,an: a
ta;i ported with Yoy,propofes the Hour
a, :I?; -e of iMceting. Sir, fays this Lady coldly to
'; , ,!
n A tarhn'd . ith this Diamond; and the rea-
ib- -.... ',- Iha-e accepted it without Scruple, is be-
cav ,% it belon;gs to me. Yes, Sir, this Diamond is
rnil~c my H'-lband took it from offmy Toilet some
Three Montiis ago,and made me afterwards believe
he had lo- ' . That cannot be, replys our Fop, it
was a M.ircbioiefs that exchang'd it with me for
fomeihing that ihall be Nameless.

Right, ri!ght, continues the Woman, my Husband
was acquainted ith this Marchioness, .he Truck'd
with herrr fomy Diamond, the Marchioness Truck'd
,ith you for it, and I take it for nothing, tho' if I cre of
a Revengeful Nature, my Htuband very well deserves,
that Iftouldgive thefame Price for it as he receiv'd
ifrom the Marchinnefs. At this unexpe&ed Blow our
fine Thing food Confounded and Aftonifh'd; but
I can now forgive his being Mute upon so Odd an
Occasion. A Man of Wit and Sence could hardly
avoid it.

That Great L9rd yonder, was Bred and Born a
Lord: His Soul is full as Noble as his Blood, his
Thoughts as high as his Extradion I Efteem,but
don't Admire his Lordflip ; but the Man, who by his
Merits and Virttes raises himself above his Birth and
Education, I both Esteem and Admire.

Why then ihould you, whose Virtues equal your
Fortune, conceal the meanness of your Original,
which raises the ilftre of your Merit? We ihall bet-
tcr esteem the Merit of your Elevation.

Look,

Look,yonder goes a Man, fays one that takes up-
on him so much of the Lord, that one would think
he had never been any thing else. It often happens
that by our Over-aCing of Matters, the World dif-
covers we were not always the Men we appear.
While I made my RefleCionsmy Indian was like-
wife bufie in making his. He did not so much won-
der at the Man in the Embroidered Coat, who did
not know himself, as at the Assembly, who likewise
feem'd not to know him. He was treated with the
respect due to a Prince ; these are notCivilities,but
downright Adorations. What, cannot you be con-
tent, fays our Indian, cannot you be content to Ido-
lize Riches that are useful to you ? Must you likewise
Idolize the Rich,who will never do you a Farthings-
worth of Kindness ?

I confers, continued he, that I cannot recover out
of this Astonishment. I fee another Man of a very
good Look come into the Circle, and no body takes
the least Notice of him. He has feated himself, and
Talks, and very much to the purpose too, and yet
no one will vouchsafe him a Hearing. I observe,
the Company Files off from him by degrees, to ano-
ther part of the Room, and now he is left alone by
himself. Wherefore,fay I to my self, do they fnun
him thus? Is his Breath contagious,or has heaPlague-
Sore running upon him ? At the fame time I took
Notice, that these Deserters had flock'd about the
Gay Coxcomb in the laced Suite, whom they wor-
hipp'd like a little God. By this I came to under-
ftand,that the Contagious Distemper the other Man.
was troubled with was, his Poverty.

Oh Heavens ! fays the Indian,falling all on the fud-
den into an Enthufiaftick Fit,like that wherein you
saw him in his Letter; Oh Heavens,' Remove me
quickly out of aCountry where they shut their Ears
to the wholfom Advice and sage Inftr&uions of a
Poor Man, to liftenr to the Nonfelfical Chat of a Sot
ian aud.y Cloaths. They seem to refuse this Philo-

fopher

fopheb a Place among Men, because his Apparelis
but indifferent, while they rank that Wealthy Cox,
comb in the Number of the Gods. When I behold
this abominable Sight, I cou'd almost pardon those
that grow Haughty and Insolent upon Prosperity.

This latter Spark a little while ago was less than
a Man among you, at present you make a fort of a
Deity of him. If the Head of their new Idol Thould
grow Giddy, he may e'en thank th6fe who Incense
him at this abominable rate.

There are among us in my Country, continues
he, a fort of People who Adore a certain Bird for
the Beauty and Richness of its Feathers. To juftifie
the Folly wherein their Eyes have engaged them,
they are perfwaded that this proud Animal has a
DivineSpirit that animates him. Their Error is in.
finitely more excusable than yours; for,in lhort,this
Creature is mute,but if he could talk like your Brute
there in the rich Embroidery, they'd soon find him to
be a Beast, and perhaps would forbear to adore him.

This sudden Transport carry'd our well-mean-
ing Traveller a little too far. To oblige him to drop
his Discourse, I defir'd him to cast his Eyes upon a
certain Gentleman in the Circle, who deserved to
have his Veil taken of, with which he covered him-
self, to procure tle Confidence ofFools. Examine
well thisferious Extravagant. The Fool's Bawble
he makes such a pother with, is his Probity, an ami-
able thing indeed, if his Heart were affe&ed by it;
but 'tis only the Notion of it that has Fly-blown his
Head. Because, forsooth, it has not yet appear'd
in his Story, that he is a Notorious Cheat and Falfi-
sier, upon the Merit of this Reputation, the Insel
thinks himself the most Virtuous Man in the World.
He demands an Implicite Faith to all he fays. You
mufl not question any thing he is pleas'd to affirm,
but mu f pay the fame Deference to his Words as
to the Sacred Oracles of Truth it self. If he thinks
fit to afert, that Ronmuls and Remus were Grandchil-

% . - dreo

dren to olz ofGdauit,'tis a Breach of Good Manners
to enquire into their Pedigrees.

If any Difierence happens, he pretends his Word.
is a Decree, from which you cannot Appcal with-
out Injustice. He takes it foi a high Affriont, if you
do but ask him to give you the common Security.

All the Universe must understand that his Ver-
bal Promise is worth a Thousand Pounds. He would
fain have perfwaded his Wifes Relations to have gi-
ven him her iln Marriage upon his bare Word,with-
but making a Settlemcent. He assets to be exatly
nice to a tittle inl all- his Exprefiions, and if you
think it imiioflible to find it in him, all his iiords
yon ought to believe to a Hairs breadth: Nothing
jcfs, and nothing beyond it. If ever he gives you
libcrty to Strtchc a little, it must be in his Commen-
dation. LettheConverfatiolturn upon what Sub-
jecd it pleases, be it of Salr, or of RcQi;ion2, Moraiity,
or Politicks, he will pcrpetuallv thruIt his rNof. into
it, though he is sure to be laugh'd at for his Pains,
and all to make a fine Parade of his own good Qla-
lities and Virtue.s.

A certain Lady for Inriance,after she had effeidual-
ly proved, that all Gallantry and Sincerity was ex-
tince amongthe young Fellows of this Age, corred-.
ed her felfpleafantly in this manner. I am in the
roiong Gentlemen, fays file, I.am in the wrorg, I own
it. There is such a thing as Sincerity till among
the Men: 7hey speak all that they think of .T Wo-
men. ...

Upon the bare. Aention ofthe Word Sinceritv,our
Gentleman thought he had a fair opportunity to
enlarge upon his own. Every Man, fays ihe, has
his particular Faults; My Fault is to be too sincere.
Soon after this, the. Discourse fell upon other Mat-
ters,as want of Compaffionand Charity in the Rich.
What an excess of Barbarity, cries our Man of Ho-
nour, is this ? For my. part, I always fall into, the
opp4fite Exfreami. I melt at. every thing, I am to.

H Co. 0Good

Good in my Temper, but'tis a Fault I ihall never
Corre& in my self. To make Ihort, another who
towards the Conclusion of his Story, happen'd acci-
dentally to let the Word Avarice drop from him,
found himself interrupted by our modif Gentleman,
who made no diffculty to own that Liberality was
his Vice. AJ Sir, replied the Man coldly, who was
interrupted, yJu have three areat Vices, Sincerity,
Goodinefs, and Liberality. This cxcef. of ^ldelly
in you, which makes you own there Vices, give n:e
to understand, Sir, that you are Master of all the
contrary Virtues.

In my Opinion now, this was plucking offthe Vi-
zor of our Sir Formal. This was discharging a Pi-
0fol at his Breast one would have thought it wou'd
have went to the very Heart of him. In the mean
time he did not so much as feel the Blow ; the Callos
of his Vanity had made him invulnerable, he takes
every thing you fay to him in good part. Call him
in an Ironical manner, the Great Heroe ofProbity,he
takes you in the Litteral Sencf. Tell him in the
plain Language of . 0. that he's a confounded Raf-
cal, Oh Sir, fays he, your humble Servant, you are
disposed to be merry I find: Thus he takes it for
Raillerv.

The Raillers have a fine time on't you fee, to Jefl
upon a Man of so Oily a Temper. What a Vexa-
tion is it to your Gentlemen that speak sharp and
witty Things, to level them at fofjipplc a Slave. All
the Pleasure wou'd be to touch him to the Quick,to
confound his Vanity. Wit does but hazard it self
by Attacking him in the Face, there's nothing to
be got by it : Vanity is a WIall of Brars.

But I find nothing will be loft. There fits a Gen-
.tieman in the corner of a quite different Temper,
who takesevery thing upon himself that was meant
to another. He Blv-fl s, he grows Pdle, he's outof
Countenance; at last quits the Roomn, and as he
,oes out, threatens all the Company with his Jyes,

*What

What does the World think of this holding up the
Buckler, they put but a bad Conftruclon upon it,
and fay that his Conscience is Vlcerated, that you
cannot touch any String, but it ';7ill answer to fomee
painful place. Touch a Gall'd Horse and He'll VWiince.
In a word, he's wounded all over, because he's all o-
ver Sensible of Pain.

These are two Chara&ers that seem to be direP-
ly opposite ; however, it were ealie to prove that
thefetwo are the fime at Bottom. What's this Bot-
tom? Divine it if you can: One Word wou'd not
be flfficient to eplain it clearly to you, and .I am
not at leisure to give you any more. I perceive a
Man coming into the Room whom I am acquainted
with, he will interrupt me without Remorse. I had
better be beforehand with him,. nd hold my Tongue.
Silence Gentlemen,Silence, and fee you frew due Re-
fpe&. You will immediately fee one. of those No-
ble Lords, who believe that all is due to tl'cm, and
that they owe nothing to any Body. When my
Lord enter'd, every one put on a demure Look, antd
he hiimfelfcame in with a Smiling look, like a true
Politician. Immediately he makes a thousand Pro-
teltations of Friendship to every one; but at the
fame time thathe promises you his Service, he looks
as Pale as a Scotchma:i, when he offers you his Purse.
He is scarce fate down in his Chair,but he embroils
the Conversation. Hetalksto fourfeveral Persons
about four several AffEirs at once : He puts a Quc-
frion to one Man, without waiting for an A4nfic of
another: He proposes a Doubt, treats it, and re-
solves it all by himself. He's not weary of 'alk-
ing,thoughall the Compa ny be of eiring him. They
iteal off by ;degrees, and so the Circle ended.

The Publick is a great Spe&acle always New,
which iprefents it self to the Eyes of private Men,
and Amuses them. These private Men are si ma-
ny diverfifed Spe&acles, that offer thenifelves to
theiublick View, and Divert it. I have already as

i1 2 it

it were in Minature, shew'd some few of these small
inconsiderable private Spe&acles, which will suffice
to point out the reft,and therefore to draw towards
a Conclusion, shall in the last Place take a View of
the Desolate and frightful Country of Philosophy and
Phyfick: Those being Regions that few Visitants re;
turn from in so good a state of Health as they went,
or rather with any Life at all.

A M S E bM S NT X.
The Philofphlic!, or Virttofi Country,
TN this Country every thing is obscure, their Ha2

bitations,theirLooks, their Language, and their
Learning. 'Tis a long time ago since they under*
took to cultivate the Country of Science; but the
only Thing they have made clear and undeniable,is,
that One and One makes Two: And the Reason
why this is so clear, is because it was known by all
Men before they made a Science of it.

Their Geormetricians work upon so solid a Foun-
datidn, that as soon as ever they have well laid the
first Stone, they carry on their Buildings without
the least fear, so high as the Atmosphere; but their
Philofoplers build those haughty Edifices they call
Systems upon a quite different Bottom.

They lay their Foundation in the Aif, and.wlieil
They think they are come to solid Ground,the Build-
ing difappearso and the Architets tumble dowi
from the Clouds.

This Country of Esperimental Philosophy, is very
smufing, and their Colteffions of Rarities exceeds
that of John Trudwt'enl, for here are the Galls of
'oves, the Eve-Teeth of Flying Toads,the Eggs of
Ants, and the Eyes of dyfters. Here they weigh
ie_ Air;ri' a flr HI at i ,OCld Dr jess a.r d Hwum-ity.

great Discoveries for the publick advantage of
Alankind. Without giving our selves the trouble
to make ife of our Senses, we need but only cast our
Eyes upon a Weather-Glass, to know if'tis Hot or
Cold, if it Rains, or is Fair Weather.
Tempted by these Noble Curiosities, I desired
the favour of feeing some of the Gentlemen they
called Improvers of Nature, and immediately they
1hewed me an Old Bard cutting Afp-leaves into
Tongues, which were to be fattened in the Mouths
of Flowers, Fruits, Herbs, and Seeds, with design
to make the whole Creation Vocal. Another was
DifTeding Atomes, and Mites in Cheese, for the
improvement ofthe Anatomical Science,and a third
was transfusing the Blood of an Ass into an Aftrolo.
gical QZvack; of a Sheep into a Bully; and of a FiflJ in
to an Exchange-Woman,which had all the desired Es'
seAs; the Quack prov'd-a Sot, the Bullya Coward,and
the Tongue-Pad was Silent. All Prodigies in Nature,
and none miscarried in the Operation.

In another Apartment were a curious CoUe&ion
of Contemplative Gentlemen,that had their Employ-
ments Severally affign'd them. One was Chewing
the Cud upon Dr. Burnet's New Syrfem of the World,
and making Notes upon it in Confutation of AMoses
and all the Antidiluvian HiJforians. Another was
Reconciling the Differences among Learned Men,
as between ArifJotle and Des Cartes, Cardan and Co(
pernics, William Penn and ChriJfianity, Mr. Edwards
and Arabick. Determining the Controversy between
the Acidiftis and AlkaliJts, and putting a Period to
the Abstruse Debates between the Engineers and
foufe-trap-makers.
If any one ask me, which of these Disput-ants ha;
Reason of his fide, I will fay,that some of them have:''
the Reason of Antiquity, the other the Reafo; of Novel.,
ty; and in Matter, of Opinion, there two Reasons
have a greater influence ppon tjie Learned thaa '
Reakbn it f fE-

Those that set up for finding the North-WelE
Palage into the Land of Philosophy, would with all
their Hearts, if it were possible, follow these two
Guides all at once, but they are afraid to travel in a
Road where they talk of nothing but Accidents and
Priva.ticn, Hecceities and Entelechiiu. Then they find
themselves all on the sudden seized with Hot and
Cold, Dry and vioift, penetrated by a subtile Mat-
ter encompafled with Vortexes, and so daunted by
the fear of a Vacuum, that it drives them back; in-
read of encouraging tl:em to go forward.
A Man need not la7 it much to Heart that he ne-
ver Travel'd through this Country; for those that
have not so much as belleld it at a distance, know as
much of it almost as those that have spent a great
deal of Money and Time there; but one of their
Arts I admnire above all the reft, and that is, when
they have Coufaumed their Estates in trifling Expe-
riments, to perfwade themselves they are nowas
Rich, and Eat and Drink as Luxuriously as ever;
they view a single Shilling in a Multiplying Glass,
which makes it appear a Thousand, and view their
Commons in a Magnifying Glass which makes a
Lark look as big as a Turkey-Cock, and a Three-
penny Chop as large as a Chine of Mutton.

Before I let my Traveller pass frdm this place to
Phyfick, 'twill not be amifsto make him remark,
That in the Country of Science and the Court,we lose
our selves; that we don't search for rur selves in
;f.:rrK..y e ; that in the W.Tlks and among Women we
find our selves again; but seldom or never come
baLk from the Kingdom of Phijick.

A MU s . M E N T XI,

PHTSIC C.
T HE firit thing remarkable in the Country of

P1 sick, is, that it is situate upon. the Ni/rro?

Palfage

Passage from this World to the other. 'Tis a Cly-
nmaaerick Country, where they make us breath a
Refrelhing Air, but fucl a one as is a great Enemy
to the Natural Heat, and those that Travel far in
this Climate,throw away a world of M Ioncy in prugs,
and at lalt Die of Hunger.

The Language that is fpokcn here is very Learn-
ed; 'but the People that speak it are very Ignorant.

In other Countries we learn Languages, to be a-
ble to express what we know in clear and intelligi-
ble Terms ; but it looks as if Physicians learnt their
G;bberiJIh for no other purpofe,than to embroil what
they do not underitand.

How I pitty a Patient of good Sence that falls in-
to their Hands ? He is obliged at once to Combat
the Arguments ®f the Doctor, the Disease it self,
the Reniedies,and Emptiness. Oneofmy Friends,
whom a il this together had thrown into a Dilirium,
had a Vision in his Fever which fav'd him his Life.
He fancied he saw a Fever under the fliape of a
Burning Monfcer, that prefs'd hard upon a Sick
M:!n, and every Minute got Ground of him, till a
iV.ai who look'd like a Guide came and took him
by tile lrift to help himn over a Riverof Blood. The
poor Patient had not Strength enough to cross the
Stream, and so was Drown'd. The Guide used
means to get himfclf paid for his Pains, and imme-
diatel run iafter another Sick Man,who was carried
dow a Stream o rCaridu-,s Polcet-Drink,Barly-Broth,
anld W iter-Grnel. My Friend, advised by this Vi-
fiol, discarded his Dot'or, and 'twas thisthatdid
his Bll alefs; 'or when he was by himself, there was
no Bo-y to hinder him from recovering. The Ab-
fence of Physicians is a Soveraign Remedy to him
that has not Recourse to a Quack.

These Gentlemen of the Faculty are Penfoners to
Death, and travel Day and Night to enlarge that'

on!larch's Empire ; for you must know, notwith-
standing diftemper'd Humours make a Man sick,

H 4 'tis

'tis the Physician has the honour of killing him, anQ
expedts to be well paid for the Jobb, by his Rela-
tions, thdt lye in wait for his Life to share his For-
tune: So that when'a Mlan is ask'd how such a one
died, he is not prefentlyto answer according to
corrupt Cu ftor, That he died of a Fcver or a Pleuri-
fie, but that he died of the DocTor.

See a Confl!t of 'en marching in state to aPa;
tient, attended by a diminutive Apothecary that's
juss A-fe high, and fit to give a Glyfter ; how ma-
gifterially they look, and talk of the Patient's Re-
covery, when they themselves are but Death in a
Disguise, and bring the Patient's Hour along with
'em. While the Patient breaths and Money comes
rhey are still prescribing; but when they have sent
the Parient hence, like a Rat with a Straw in his
A-fe, they'll fay his Body was as rotten as a Pear,
and 'twis impossible to save him. Cruel People, that
are not contented to take away a 1 an's Life, and
like tih Hgmi,:, be paid when they have done, blt
mnuf Perflecute him in the Grave too, and blast his
HEono:r, to excuse their Ignorance.

It were to be wilh'd that every Physician might
be obiig'd to marry, for it's highly reasonable that
those Men fiould beget Children to the State, who
every day rob the King of so many Subjects.

In this Land of Phyfick they have eret'ed them-
feives a Ciiege, for the improvement of the Mystery
of Manisiaughter, which may be calld their Armory,
for here are theirWeapons and Utensils forg'd, and
a Company of Men attending to kill Poor Eolks olut
of meer Charity.

In one part of their Convent is a Chymical Elabora-
tOr, where fonme were calcining Calves Brains, to
supply those of the Society that wanted; some fix-
'ing volatile Wits, and others rarifving dull ones:
Some were playing Tricks with Mlercury, promiling
'themfeives vait Advantages from the Process; but;
afcr; they had rcfolv'd the vifcoas matter, and

brought

brought the Materia Prima into the Copper, all went
avay in a Fume, and tile Operator had his Labour
for his Travel.

In another place were Apothecaries preparing AMe-
dicines; the outsides of their Pots were gilt withl
the 'itles of Preservatives, Cordials, and Pharmacons,
but in the inside were 2Poyfons, or more nauseous
Preparations. However, of all our late pretended
.ilclhymifts, recommend me to the Afothecaries,as the
nobleit Operators and Chymifts for out of Toads, Vi-
pers, and a Sir-reverence it self, they will fetch ye
Gold ready minted, which is more than ever Para-
cdfsz himself pretended to.

Here were also Chirurgeons in great Numbers,
talking hard Words to their Patients, as Solution
of Continuity, Dislocations, Fractures, Amputation,
P!l]botomy, and spoke Greek Words, without ui-
(le, kanding the Englifi) of them. One of the Gra-
Cve2 among them, rropounded this Question to the
resr. Suppose a 3lan falls from the Main-rard, and
lies all bruiscd upon the Deck, pray what is the
FiY. ;ttrcntion in that Cafe? A Brisk Fellow alt-
frwcs, You must give him Irifl Slate cjuantumfifticit,
a;d Enmbrocate the Parts affetecd Siccundiim Artem.
At whicl I seeming to Smile, another Reprimand$s
rRe, fiying, WhTat do you Laugh at, Sir, the Man's i'th'
rigt an't. To whom I reply'd, With Reverence to
your Age and Underfianding, Sir, I think he's iq
the srcorg; for if a Man falls from the. .fain-Tard.
the first Intention is, To take him up again.
Amo!ngall these People every tbingis made a My-
fiery, to detain their Patients in Ignorance, and:'
keep up the Market ofPh l91ck; but were not the ve-
ry Terms of Art and Names of their Medicines sus-
ficient to fright away any Difteinpers, 'tis to be
cfared their Remedies would prove worse than the
That nothing might be wanting in this Famous
College, there were others that like Porters and
."! ' . ' '
' I'' I Ptaift:scr

Plaifterers flood ready to be Hired, as Corn-Cutters
and Tooth-Drawers. The One of which will make
you Halt beo're the best Friend you have; and if
you do but Tanwn, the other Knaves will be examin.
ing your Grinders, Depopulate your Mouths, and
make you Old before your time, and take as -nuch
for Drawing oat an Old Tooth, as would buy a Sett
of New ones.

An ill Accident happened while we were view-
ing the Curiosities of this College. A Boy had fial.
lowed a Knife, and the Members of the College be.
ing fitting, he was brought among them, if it were
poflible, to be cured. The C'hirurgecns clain'd the
Patient as belonging to their Fraternity, and one
of 'em would have been poking a Crane's Bill down
his Throat to pluck it up again, but the Do&ors
would not susser him.

After a long Confultation,one of the two Reme-
dies was agreed on, viz. That the Patient Ihould
fwavlow as much Aquafortis as would diflblve the
Knife into Minute Particles, and bring it away by
Seige; but the other Remedy was more Philofophi-
cal,andtherefore better approv'd, and that was, to
apply a Lgadft one to his Arse, and so draw it out by
a l.Ma.netick Attraction ; but which of the two was
put in pra&ice I know not, for I did not flay to fee
the Noble Experiment, tho' my particular Frie;a
Dr. Wi-d was the first that proposed that Reme-
dy, and he is no Qjiack, I alnure you.

Notbut that there are fomeQliacksas lhonel Fel-
lows as you would desire to Piss upon. This So-
reigner here, for infrance, is a Man of Conscience,
that will take you but Halfa Crown a Bottle for as
good Lambs-conduit Waterasever was in the world.
He pretends it has an Occult Quality that Cures all
Diltempers. He Swears it, and Swears like T. 0.
on the right fide of the Hedge, since this very Indi-
vidual Water has Cured him of Poverty, which
comprehends all Difeafes.i

?Tis

'Tis with Phyficiansin London,as with Almanacks,
the Newest are the molt Consulted; but then their
Reign, like that of an Almanack, concludes with the
Year.

When a Sick Man leaves all for Nature to do, he
hazards much: When he leaves all for the Dotor
todo, he hazards more: And since there is a Ha-
zard both ways, I would much sooner chufe to rely
upon Nature; for this, at least, we may be sure of,
That she a&s as Honestly as she can, and that she
does not find her Account in prolonging the Di-
f fTe.

So much for Phyfick, which as it is the last thing
I fnould be persuaded to take, so it's the last Coun-
try I fl- ll Travel thro' for the Present; and if the
Reader has any good Nature in him, he'll congratu-
latc yn fasc Arrival from a Place where there are
so miany Obstacles to be met with, before you cau
pofiibly return from it.

1he End of the Amusements.
1___11___ _ I__

ogs
LETTERS

Serious and Comical,

By the Author of the
AMUSEMENTS,

Suited to the present Age by %so. Brown,
To iMadam --- - ewing ho v a young Gentle4

r:~,a that ad try'd all oiher Methods uvirccefs.
fd(Jy, made his Mist-ress corply witth him, by
'tkireatni;sg toftarve irmfelf in her Clofit.
Y U will excuse me,Madam, if I have made

hold to fend you a remarkable Accident
which lately happen'd in these Parts of the
World; and for the Truth of which, dare pawn my
Reputatioi to you. It will give you a wholfome Te.
,rimony of the Power of Love, and serve to inftru&
you, that when a Lover is once positively resolved to
gain his Point, the best thing a Womazn can do, is to
irike up a Bargain with him, and lose no more
time in Ca.pitulating.
'. Monieur - had courted a Lady two Years'
but wasTo unfortunate as not to make the least Pro-
grefs in her Affecion. All his Services, his Cares,
is Refepts, his Cmplaints; in short: all his 12 rs.

:' :
.:- '
* :*
: ' *land

And paoteftations, had prov'd unsuccessful. One
Day, happening to be alone with her in her Clo;
let, he fairly and plainly told her,that since nothing
was capable of touching her, he was fully resolved to
die, and plt an end to his Pains. This Discourse, I
rmuft confess, had nothing that- Was/ingularin it
Fora thoufandMenhavethreatnedto dispatch them-
felvesthat never intended it; butwhat follows,you'li
ein to be very particular: And to the end, Afadam,
fays he, that you mayfully enjoy my Death, and have the
Satisfafion to fee itfteal upon me by degrees, lam re"
solved to die of Hunger here in your Closet. With that,
he flung himself upon the Floor, resolving to put
his Delign in Execution from that very Moment.
The young Lady only laughed at him, and left him
there,making no question but that he would be gone
in less than a quarter of an Hour. In the mean time
the Evening approach'd- yet our Trusty Lover still
continu'd inthe Closet. She came to fee him, and
ask'd him whether his Brains were notgrown addle,
and whether he intended to take up his Quarters
there. To both which Questions our Gentleman.
inadp no manner of Reply; so that the Lady was ob-
liged to leave him. In ihort, the Night pased, and
next Morning the Lady came very early to advifc
him to lay aside. this foolish Resolution; but all ihf
:ould get from him was, Madam, I have already done
mnyfelfthe Honour to acquaint you with my laZf Inten-
tions. Having said this, he look'd languifsingly up-
on her, fetch'd a deep Sigh, and turned his Head the
bther way. On the 7hirdDay, our. Lady,more per-
plex'd than ever, brought him romething to eat
With her own Hands. 'Tis impossible to tell you
with what afcornful Look he beheld it: He appear-
td in this flort time to be considerably aeakned ; his
Byes look'd deadand heavy,his Complexion pale,and
there feem'd to be something wild and diftrafed ir.
his Looks.. The fourth Day no sooner arriv'd, but
iit Lady begag seriously and gravely to confider

what

-what a cruel Scandal this would be to her, if tii
did not take care toprevent it. How! a Man die in
my Closer, kill'd by Despair, kill'd by Hunger:. I am
utterly undone if I don't hinder it. What malicious
Stories will the Nei ghbourhood raise of me, if this
mhould happen ? Perhaps by this time too Love had
gain'd fomeGround upon her Heart; and I am apt
to believe,for my part, that Love work'd as power-
fully with her as the Fear of Scandal. However it
was, she refolv'd. to go and argue the Matter with
him; and after a long Exhortation, which he did
not seem to vuinderftaznd,becaufe he was in a manner
dead; ihe told him, that since all the Arguments she
had offer'd to him, could notget him out of her Clo-
set, fthe was willing to let him go out upon his own
Conditions: With thi s, our poor Lover cast an amo-
rous Look at her, and ask'd her, whether what he
heard was trzue, or onlyllan Illuon of his Senses. She
satisfied him that all was true; when immediately
Life return'd to him; and not only Life, but a fur-
prizing Vigour, whichenabl'd him to pay offpart of
his Debt to Madam before ever he stirr'd out of the
Closet. Never did Lover make a more honourable
Retreat, that's certain: In all probability, our Lady
was mightily pleas'd with her own Charms, since
they had Efficacy enough to perform so mniraculos a
Cure ; and I don't doubt but in Reality they had a
good Share in the Miracle: But then 'tis as true,
that they ought not wholly to afnume it to them-
selves, but to divide the Glory of it with a cold
.Ncat's-Tong~uc, a Roll of Bread, and a good Bottle of
Wine, which our Lover had dexterously convey'd
under a Couch which was in the Closet ; for you must
kInow, that foreseeing he was to die, he had taken
care, like a Lood Christian as he was, to make some
Preparation for it before-hand. And now, Madam,
rethinks I fee your Ladvfnip frriking your Fanna-
gainft the Table, and crying, Was there ever such a
horrid Piece of Treachery ased? What will this

wicked

wicked Age come to? And yet, Madam; I must
take the/Freedom to tell you, that I look upon that
IWoman to be happy, exceeding happy, who has a Lo-
ver that can cheat her so ingeniously : For, in the
first place, lhe has the Honour of having done all
that can be requir'd from a Lady of the most rigid
Virtue; and, Secondly and lastly, file has the Plea-
fire of finding her Appetite gratiiy'd without the
least Iniury to her Honour. I dare engage that our
young Lady has not been backl'ard to teftifie her
Love to Monsieur - , and that,'to convince
hini of it, fle has sent him home, an hundred times
since, with as much Satisfacdion. as then, and less
Hunger. The Truth on't is, he deferv'd this kind
Treatment, if it were only for the Fruitfulness of his
Invention. Others take Towns by blocking them up
till they starve 'em ; whereas our Lover carried the
Place before him, by only pretending toftarve him-
self. Well, this was certainly one of the prettiest
Stratagems in the World. All the Mischief is, that
you Ladies, for the future, will take no notice of us
Lovers,when we talk of dying for you; tho', after all,
I am apt to believe, that it will do us no very great
Harm neither. You may find by this flort Story
that our Cavalier had come off but blewly had the
Lady's Rigour continu'd; but to our Comfort be it
remembred, her Vertuous Resolutions did not hold
out so long, as a fmnall French Roll, and a Jingle Bot-
tle of Wine.
To Macdam de P- , ' Vpon her refuing to mar-

ry her Daughter to a Coufin-German.
/7 Ith all due Submission be it spoken, methinks
V your Ladyship overstrains the Point a little,
in so positively refusing to marry your Daughter to
Monsieur de S _-. You tell us you don't approve

of

of a Marriage betwixt two Cozrin--termans3 but filre
Iv, Madam, you can never believe this to be any
awvful Impediment in Hymen'sSpiritual Court.
Would you have Monlieur S -- think Mai
dam P -- to be less agrceable because he is her
Coufin-German ? This fort of Reasoning may ap.
pear firong& to you ; but has not Beauty much firon er
Arguments ? Has a Man his Genealogy always before
his Eyes, and when he fees a charming Young Wo-
man, is he oblig'd to call to mind, that He and Shf
came from the fame Grandfather, when the Qrand.

ldaugher is in the Room, especially iffhle is beauti-
ful ? But after all,what have you to fayagainft Mon.
iieur de S ---? For my pait, I think he has be-
liaved himself like a very good Relation: For ill
fiead of Friendflip, he has fliew'd his Love to your
Family; and if he finds himself disappointed, the
Fault will lie at your Consent, your Lady rip may
be pleased to remember, that all the good Folks in
the Old Tefiament always married intheir own Tribe;
and that oie thonfand seven hundred Years ago,
Mtonfieur de S - had been oblig'd in Conscience
to love your Ladvfhip's pretty Daughter, and no one
else. I own, that things have been somewhat chang.
ed- Fnce that - but then I beg of you to give your
Concint, that the vouing People may fend to Rome, to
fee if the old Gentleman vill grant 'em a Difpena
tion. I need not inform you, Madam,that such Aar-
riges are p e-rmitted between Relations, when their
Ejtatres or Ladjs are so entang!'d one with another,
that there iP no dividinga 'em without endless Law
Stis I coCnfes, that our young Peo'le have not tbis
'Reason to ailcdge for themifelves; but what is eve-
ry jot as fo/cible, they may fay, that the Affairs of
their Hearts arc so trangely embroiled together,tllat
it is too late now to think of parting 'em. If your
Daughter were an Hcirefs, in whom your Name
wonld c.pirc, and who would carry all your Efiat
into a ira;ie Fiaily, I ton't d'oubt, but that out of

a just concern for your Estate and Family,you wou'd
employ all your Interest to procure her a Difpcefa-
tion to marry a Iinnman of the Name. Now, what
ought to go muchfarther with your Ladyship, your
Daughter has Beauty and Charms that are infinitely
more valuable than all the dirty Acres and Lands in
the Kingdom, which will a1uredly go out of your
Family,and perhaps never come into it again, if your
Ladyihip flmould force her to marry any one else but
Moflieur S--. As for me, that have the Honour
to be related to yon, tho';at a great diflance, I can't
forbear to concern my self in the Beauty of youi Fa-
mily. For which Reason I conjure you not to im-
poverlfh it, by bestowing your pretty Daughter else-
whjere, and by obliging Monsieur S-" to make a-
nother Choice. You fee how the whole Family of
the L-'s are deformed and ugly, fothat itwill take
up a hundred Years, I warrant you, before they re,
cover themselves. Let us take fair Warning by this
Example; and since we have Beauty in our: Poses.
sion, be so wife as'to preserve it.

} . .
To Madarm J.--, pon her talkingof him in her

Sleep,
Madam,
Receiv'd an Account the other day of the great
Favour you have lately done me. Tis in vail
for you to difownyourPaffion: 'Tis certain you love
me in your Heart, and your Sleep has betray'd your
deepest Secrets. See, Madam, what a Folly it is.t,
pretendtoconceal ones AfeTkions,and hide 'em fronm
those that occasion'em. If you had frankly own'd
all to me, I afure you, I wou'd have given you no
Reason to fid fault with my Secrecy, but you were
resolved to trust it with no other Confident but your
self; when as it has happen'd, you have not been so

I difrreet

discreet as'twas expeced. From hence, Madam;
you may learn-this useful Doirine, not to rely alto.
gether upon your self. You will tellme,'perhaps,
th it you talk'd in your Dream you knew not what;
but had you not done much better to have freely
and honestly told me, what you afterwards owned in
your Sleep, without knowing it? Had it not been
much more prudent to acquaint me with your Pas.
sion in a few Words, than to speak of it thus in the
Night, like a Person that was betide her self? Love
loses no time, and therefore you ought to have com.
municated this Secrerto me, which, you fee, will
escape from you Women sooner or later. If your
Ref.on enjoyns you Silence, yet your Reason will
take a Napp, and'then Love will not be idle: If your
Virtue can answer for your Days, yet what can an-
fwer for your Nights ? That Interval belongs all
to Lvoe; and accordingly you fee that the Secret of
so many Days has frole from you in one Night. But
Madanm, may I make so bold as to ask you ufider
what Figure I appear'd to you,,when you declar'd
your felfin my Favour ? for an Opportunity may
offer it-self hen' I {hall be¥very- glad to re-afiime
the fame Shape. For my part, I am apt to believe
that I was very haughty and insolent ; for hitherto I
have been able to obtain nothing of you with all my
Submjlion and Refpet. Don't tell me that I ought
to draw no Consequence from what you said in the
Night: It was you that spoke then, and you alone;
whereas in the Day 'tis Confiraint, 'tis Ceremony, 'tis
Difimulation, that speaks. By this you may find
that for the future I Ihall be insensible to all the Rigors
you shew me in the Day time; and let your Treat.
ment be then what it will, I shall tell you that you
will unsay it again at Night. In mhort, I lhall take
you for one ofthofe cunning Hypocrites who never
appear as they are, but in the dark: but whereas o-
ther Ladies leave all their Ornaments upon their 7oi-
Itcs, when they go to. Bed, you leave that trouble-

some

fome:Load, your Severity, upon yours. How hap-
py must the Man be, who can fee your Iadyfhip and
the reft of your Sex, such as you are in your Primi-
tive State, without any of thofe.Arts that' conceal
you from us at other times.

To the/fme Lady.
Ince you did me the Honour to talk of me in your
Dreams, I have not been able to sleep a minute,
so strangely am I diftra&ed between 7oyandSorrow.
It is the greatest Satisfaction in the World to me
to find my self so near your Heart; but at the fame
time I tremble as often as I think that our Secrets
are in such danger of being divulg'd. I am not at
all difpleas'd to fee you so referv'd in the Day-time:
But this unaccountable Affe&ion and Eagernefsat
Night alarms me; for in thort, Madam, I am a-
fraid that you'll discover all our Intrigues. What
Method then fliall we take to manage our Affairs
with more Security ? For my part, I. know but one,
which I beg you to take into your Consideration.
Be not then, if you please, altogether so severe in
the Day,and I give you leaveto make it up a-Nights,
and dispense with you from thinking of me then.
'Tis a plain Cafe, that Love cannot always ride full
speed: There is a certain time when the tendereJf
things di/fgfi,and 'tis impofiible to hold out twenty
four Hours in the fame Strain of Pallion, and not
find some finall giving back of the Spring. 'But by
talking of me in your Sleep, you have gain'd that
ACcendant over my Heart, that for the future it will
wholly be devoted to your Service. A Favour so un-
deferv'd and so unexpeced makes me disregard all
the Ladies I fee; it effaces all their Charms, spoils
the Luifre of their Eyes, and ruins all their Shapes.
What is more, I am not at all mov'd with the Con-

1 2 verfatioa

verfation of the Wlittieft Women: For what can the
happiest of her whole Sex, with all her Pains and
Application too, fay -that is comparable to what
you speak at random in your Dreams, even when
you don't think on't ? This Kindness of yours, has
intirely baniLf'd my Flemif Mliftrcfs from my
Thoughts, and has done her a Prejudice, which all
her other Good Qualities will never be able to re.
trieve. I am inform'd fle fleepsvery profoundly,ald
that her Imagination, which is not over-ative in
the Diy, enjoys a more profound Repose at Night.
Now this isa Fault which I can never pardon the si-
nest Woman upon Earth. I cannot apprehend
how 'tis poffiblefor a Man tolove a l'oman,who does
nlot rave now and then, and talk of him when the
Fit seizes her. May I be hated by the whole Sex,
if I would not refuse Venlts if the had not this Quali.
fication. Therefore,Madam,takegood Advice from
your humble Servant, and .continue these affetio-
nate Fits. Love it self is a fort of Diftration, but
so plem.ing and delightful that the Wisdom of Philofo.
pfers is not to be brought in competition ·with it.
LETTERS to the MEN,

by the Author of the A M u s E M E N T S.
To Mlotnieur de 0-, upon asking his Advice,

whether he fhouild marry ayounog Gentletnworna
that rvas very beatzful, but bad no Fortune.
Dcar Cousin,
y7 OU little imagine what a severe Task you im.
I pos'd upon me when you defir'd me to advise
you in the present Poflure of your Affairs. On oki
hand you are up to the Ears in love with a pretty
young Lady; onthe other, your Father fends you

word,

word,that he will certainly difnherit you if you mar-
ry her. To be plain with you, I don't know what
Advice to give you. There are but two Ways for
you to take, the Heroick, which is to prefer your
Patflon to every thing on this fide Heaven; and the
prudent, which is, not to lose fifteen hundred Pounds
a Year for a Mistress, tho' she was as beautiful as an
Angel: Now you need only consult your felfto be a-
bleto determine this Point. I make no quelion
hut your Inclination leads you to a& the Hero; but
the Difficulty is not what you are at present, but
what you may be hereafter. I would advise you to
follow your Greatness of Soul, if you could be cer-
tain that it wou'd never leave you : But the Mif-
chiefon't is, there isno relying upon it; for perhaps
it may take its Farewel of you, even before the Ho-
ney-Moon is over. In short, a Manfoon grows wea-
ry of playing the Hero, but the Devil is in him that
grows weary ofagood Estate. You never yet saw
fifteen hundred Pounds a Year make People forget
their Vows, tho' Beauty, to its Mortification, has of-
tel seen it. I know fillwell, that these Arguments
will appear verygrofs to you; and that they are de-
cry'd in all the Metaphyick Systems of Love: Yet it
vexes me, that the Experience I have of this wicked
World, will not permit me to recommend these I-
deas to you, which I own to be much more Noble
and Delicate, than those that are built upon fordid
kitereJf. 'Tis not my Fault, if I don't believe that
Love is sufficient to make a Man happy: I ihould be
glad to believe it with all my Heart: But why has
Love deceiv'd so many thou sands of his Votaries be-
fore my Face, whom he promis'd to provide so
plentifully for, that they shou'd want nothing ? If
he deceives us when he has his Arms at liberty, I
have much stronger Reason to believe he'll do it
when he's manacled with a Family. ,You may flat-
ter your self perhaps, that you will find a thousand
Charms, and all the Obfequlious- Refpc& that can be

I 3 jmagin'd4

imagin'd, in the Person you are going to marry, be-
cause ihe owes all to the Man tlhatfacrific'd his For-
tune to her. Take care that this be not the very
Rock on which your Marriage splits. As the World
goes at present, a Woman's Gratitude may easily
fall short of the Obligation file has received, and yet
it ought not to pass for a Prodigy. I shou'd be very
loth to marry a Woman,whom I might have as juif
a Pretence to quarrel with, as you will' have with
yours. In my Opinion, that Man is an unhappy
Wretch indeed, who has other Matters of Complaint,
besides those that Matrimony naturally furnilhes of
its self. A Woman, take her in the belt Circum-
frances you can, has but too many Obligations to her
Husband, why then shou'd you involve her deeper in
your Debt ? Confider that this will make her much
more your Wife than any other Woman could have
been ; and consequently make you less happy with
her: Betides, you can't imagine what a cruel Pu-
nifimentit will be to you,that you dare never open
your Lips to cornplain of !.er, but must carry oil with
Honour what you began in a foolish Freak. Thus you
must always seem to be charm'd with her Behavi-
our,even at the very time when you are angry with
her in your Soul. F or my part, I make no Scruple
to own to You, that I wou'd not for all the World
deprive my self of the Libertyof railing a little at my
Wife, whenever I should have a Fancy that way.
Bestow a little Consideration upon there Reasons;
but before You wholly determine your self, abltain
from reading Romances, and' Books of that nature,
that will rather serve to feed than cxtinguifh the
Fl,.ae. Thus,Sir,l have sent you my Thoughts free-
ly upon this Head, without persecuting you with a
long Sermon,after the mannrer of a Cholerick Father,
or an ill-natur'd Vnc!e. I am not- wife or morose c,
nough to pretend to speak to you.in that Language.
However, I fancv-I have in a very¥little Compass

told

told you all that needs be said to you upon this Oc--
calion by People that are mole waife o rnorofe thani

SIR,

T our most Humble, &c.
To Monsieur de B---, How he had brought

Quarrel upon his Hands for Jtanding upfor leda
lI7omen, againtf the Fat.
Am going to furprize You with an odd Adven-
ture. Altho' I have liv'd so many Years in the
Army without a Quarrelupon my Hands, I am now
cngag'd in a very strange one ; and what d'ye think
was the occasion of it ? You must kilow,Idined very
peaceably at my own Lodgings: and after Dinner
was o&ver, I took a Walk with four or five Gentle-
pien in the Garden. We had exbaJfted all the pub-
lick News at Dinner: We had'drain'd the Gazettes
and the Mercuries, talk'd over all the Disorders of
Rol.md, and the Troubles of Hungary ; and what
fiou'd our Discourse run upon now, but Women ?
You cannot expec that the Conversation of Soldi-
ers shou'd turn upon Matters of Gallantry in so fine
and delicate aStrainas the Conversations in Cl(elia.
Thus, we did not amuse our selves about the Diffe-
rence between Love and FriendJhip,or aflign the pre-
cife Limits between Efreem and Inclination. The
Question in debate was, who were the handsomest
of the two, the lean Women, or thefat: Since I was'
oblig'd to chufe one of these two ExtreamsI refolv'd
to declare my self in favour of the Lean. There
hapned to be a broken Captain in the Company,
who began to maintain the opposite Side, but with
as much Fury and Eagerness, as if he had been going
to ingage an Enemy: So that I was forc'd to raise
the Pitch of my Voice to keep up with him. He

I 4 i reteded

pretended that there was Grace and Majefly in a Fat
Woman,which commanded Refpe& and Adoration
from all that saw her: All this I trirn'd into Ridi.
cule, and perform'd my part so happily, that I had all
the Laughers on my fide. When it came to my Mi,
litary Man's turn to jear the Lean, not a Man of us
seconded his Raillery. This went to the very
Heart and Soul of hii. As for me, I exprefs'd my
self in the Language of a Conquerour; and I must
own to you, that my Vanity was not a little pusf'd
up with having gain'd so important a Vilory for the
Lean. My Spark, inrag'd at his Defeat, began at
last to be scurrilous, and addreft himfelfperfonally
to me; but the Company thought it became 'em in
point of Prudence to put a Stop to the Controver-
-ie. They told me,thatthe Captain was a passionate
Admirer of a Fat Lady, which made him espouse
the Interejf of all that were in her Circumstances;
but this they ought to have inform'd me of before
by some Sign or other: And as I was not in, love
with any lean Woman, I fnou'd not have contelted
the Point with him. 'Tis about fifteen Days ago
since this Dispute hapned ; since which time, I have
made several Advances to my furious Antagonist,
to make him forget this Affair, but he does not feenl
dilfos'd to hear ofany Terms of Accommodation.
I fippofe by this means he hopes to ingratiate him-
felfwith his Mliftrefs, and that, among other Prote-
Itations, he has fwvre to her by all that is good and
ficred, never to forgive the presumptuous Wretch
that should think irreverently of a double Chin, and
a Tun-Belly. rTicerday I had engaged to wait upon
a pretty Young Ldy ata certain Hour,when I knew
I should have an Opportunity of'finding her all alone.
The time was just approaching, and my Chairmen
being out of the way, I was forc'd to trtdge it on
foot, as hard as I cou'd drive. Passing thro' a nar-
row Lane, I came full butt upon my Captain, who
cried out in an asgry Tone to me, S'life, Sir, 1have

noi

not forgot your latefacy Language: But not having a
Minute then to lose, 1 answered him with the faml
Bluntness, and without so much as looking at him,
that I was not at leisure to fight, and so on I march-
ed, having something else to do. He would have
l;een ravinf'd to have -ad an Opportunity to tilt with
me; but to deal plainly with You, I did not think
it worth the while at thattimetogo to Loggerheads
writh him. The Lord knows what will become of
this Matter; but it would )e a very pleasant Thing,
if our merry Dispute about Fat and Lean Ladies
Ihould'bring Us two before those worthy Gentlemen
the Marefchals of France. I am inform'd, that my
Adversary goes about from House to House, ftirr-
ing and prepoflefling all Fat People against me
and indeed I have obferv'd of late that they look
upon me with a very Evil Eye. Now, what Ihall I
do, dear Friend of mine, in so prefling a Danger ? I
thinkl have no other Card left me to play, but to
arm all the Lean ones in my own Defence,

SIR,I,

Tours, &c.
To M1onSieur B- , about a nice Fantaflical lVi-

dolv that wvas very difficult i her choice of.
Hmsband.
Have sent Youan Account of all that has hapned
here at my Lady L- since fle has been a Wi.
dow. To be plain with you then, fle is fully re-
folv'd to have another Husband ; but what fort of a
Husband do you think will content her ? Why Ihe
will have one that is truly, really andfincerely in love
with her, but is afraid the World has wicked Dee
igns ulpn her Estate rather than her Person,. which

is

is a very nice and reasonable Diftinftion,I must own;
but such a one as her Ladyship ought by no means
to remember at this time of day. She is observed
all along in her Discourse to leflen her Eftateas
much as he can,to hinder her humble Servants fron
loving her for the fake of her unrighteous Mammon,
and at the fame time flie makes her Age less than it
is: But 'tis not in her Ladifhip's power to prejudice
either herEflateor her Age, forall theWorldknows
to an Acre and a Month how far each of'em does
extend. I could wifn with all my heart You were
here to fee with what Contempt The talks of her
Daughter's fine Complexion, whenever the has the
leat Occasion to speak of it. Child, it is not the Li.
lies and Roses in your Cheeks that you must trus7 to,
thole Trifles are but of a fJort continuance ; but ivhat
will make you longorf beloved, is your Air and. Shabpe
Child. Now, what makes her trump up this Di-
itintion? Why, I nuft inform ou, the old Lady
hlas still a very noble Air, and a very handsome
Shape; but as-for her Complexion, it has given her
the flip many a Year ago. On the other hand, the
Daughter endeavours all she can to hinder her Mo-
thel from marrying again,becaufe it nearly concerns
her in point of Interest to do so; and this is the Rea-
son why she uses all her Address to prevent it. If
any Pretender happens to take the right way to gain
the Old Lady's Heart, the Daughter throws her self
in his Way ; and to make hint leave off the Purfult
of thatGame,fhe employs thoie never failing Charms
that always attend Youth and Beauty. This makes
her Mother wonderfully jealous, and that is Plague
enough in all Conscience: For when Ihe is once
poflefs'd with that Devil, she makes as great a Hurt
ricane, and is as difficult to be reconciled, as a
bilk'd Girl of fifteen. This Young Lady, after all,
might perhaps si nd her self mistaken in her Politicks,
if a Man of good Sense made his Court to her Mo0
ther,who without stopping fhortbythe way, would

go

the Siege till he carried the Town; but it falls out
luckily for her, that the Old Lady admits none but
young Fellows to make theirAddreffes to her; and
Youlg Fellows, You know, will always be cullied
by a Young Face. I made her uneafie for some time,
for I pretended to be mightily in love with her
Mother, who gave me no unkind Reception; and
immediately the Daughter imployed all her wheed-
ling Tricks to make a Diversion. As I had no other
Delign than to.alarm her for a while, I took care
not to fall into the rap fie had laid for me; but at
last I put her out of her Pain a few Days ago by a
Letter whichI writ to her. I have sent You a Car
py of it enclosed in this, because it may serve to give
You some Light into. the History of the Widowhood
of my Lady L--, which You are so defirousto
i Iow. lam,

SIR,
/ ,

Tour, &c.
To l/lonieur de S - , Vpon his being in love

with a Lady, whom he wrp to marry after her
Hxbr.ndf'.ecejfe,
SI R,
ACcording to the last Advices, I find You pre.
- / tend to succeed Monsieur de R - in his
Wife: I mean, You have engag'd to marry Madam
de R -- so soon as Providence is so kind to heg
as to make her a Widow. Let me tell You, this is
a Bold Engagement; not but that her good Man is
sixty Years old: but what will You fay, if the Fancy
flou'd take him to live till Ninety; or how do You

know,
To the M lE N.

I2?

know, but he may prove such a cross Dog as to
make it up a full Hundred, when his Hand is in.

'Tis now ten Years compleat since Madam de R-;
married him, by the fame token Ihe was then but
Fifeen ; and I'm afraid she is refolv'd to give him
Iraifa Score Years out of her own Stock, and make
her felfamends out of his Estate; which was the
only Reason for which fhemarried him. Not that,
properly speaking, the is a Miser in her Temper, or
cares much to heap up Wealtll for her self: She on-
ly did it for acertain Gentleman that lhall be name-
less, for whom, it seems, she had no Averflon, and
whom ihe reckon'd to marry every Day inthe week:
For it was agreed on all hands, that the Old Gen-
tleman would soon take his leave of this Tranftory
World. But to fee how ineffetual and dark-ighted
Humane Prudence is The superannuated Husband
till lives; he furviv'd the above-mention'd Lover's
Pafjion and Constancy, who foreseeing there was nq
good to be done, was e'en forc'd to marry elsewhere
in his own Defence. Another worthy Gentleman
fuccdeded him, who after itme Years spent in the
fame Exrpeiations, was glad to throw'up his Preten-
lions to a Woman, whose Husband was so obfiinatc-
ly refolv'd to live : And now, morthy Friend, You
ere coming into his Post; but I'm afraid the Old
Alan will serve You exasly as he has'tone your Pre-
decefbrs of unlucky llemory, and tlt You will not
be a Farthing the better either for Money or the
Charms of his Widow. As You have a peculiar A-
fcendant over her, I don't doubt but this Virtuous
Lady makes use of all the Ways and Means which a
Young Woman may larfully employ to dispatch an
old fumbling fellow; but finding him look as brisk as
ever, I am of Opinion le is not to be murder'd be,
tween a Pair of Sheets; and that he laughs in his
Sleeve, when the Spouse of his Bosom wou'd oblige
him by her Caresses to do that which wou'd soon
makea Manof his years a Bankript in Love. I don't

quetion

question but that 'tis the belt Cordial and Elixir in
the World to him, to fee that he enjoys more Health
thanall his Wife's humble Servants cal boast of Per-
severance. He has already seen her Court chang'd
twice or thrice, and yet he is still inthe Land of the
Living. He is so far from beingjealous at all these
obsequious Services that are paid his Lady, that he
enjoys a perse& Tranquillity of Mind upon it, which
wou'd make me stark mad, if I went upon the fame
Design as You do; For I am sure I thou'd take it for
one of the greatest Affronts in the World. This one
may gather by him, that he looks upon himfelffure
to live long enough to weary out your:Expetations;
nay, to do the fame by Your Succefor. TheAutumw
now approaches; and I know both You and his
Wife flatter your selves more than ever, to do his
Business for-him: For this reason You never let him
flip till Twelve, ply him-hard with Bumpers, look
over the Weekly Bills to fee what Distemper is likely
to have the HonQur to fend him to his longHHome,
and at last conclude,it must be a Defluxion upon his
Lungs, or an Apoplexy. However, I dare lay You
what Wager You please, that he will weather this
Season; and thatthe Fall of the Leaf will bring You
no good Tidings. 'Tis an old positive ill-natur'd'
Hunks, that will not die till his Wife's Beauty is ex-
pir'd, and her Face has gone the Way of all mortal
Faces. If he flou'd be so wonderfully complaisant
as to kick up his Heels before You,he will take care
that his Wife's Charms shan't urvive him, and will
end his Days Satisfastion after so pleasant a Piece of
Revengs. As for me, were I in your Place, I wou'd
notengage in this PaJion,norfill my Head with such
Ch;mera's as You do, unless a whole College ofPhyfi-
cians woud give it me under their Hands and Seals
that the old Fellow wou'd not live above a Monthy
or at least, promise me to give him a Civil Lift out
of the World by a time appointed. Unless a Man
cou'd propose something like this to himself, he

might

might perhape make some People think well of his
Affd&ion, but none of his Judgment.
To ilMonjietr B -, giving an Account of an

old Gentlewoman that was Caned by her Lover,
and how vain Jhe grev upon't.
Am going to fend You the most furprizing News
You ever heard. Madam D -,whom you
are so angry with for talking of Love and Galantry,
and sprucing up her decay'd Person, flourishes and
triumphs in spite of her Age, which the Malicious
fay exceeds Fifty, and lately had the most gloriou
Adventure befallen her that ever ihe cou'd have
hop'd for. In short, ihe receiv'd a few Days ago
some hearty Drubs with a good Oaken Cudgel from
her Lover, for some Suspicion of Infidelity, as she
pretends; nay, the Spark was so strangely tran-
sported, that going out of her Chamber, he thralh'd
the Lanthorn on the Stair-Case all to Pieces. Old
Piss is grown so insupportably proud, upon receiv-
ing such visible Tokens of her Gallant's Affe&ioi,
that there's no enduring of her. She maintains in
all Companies, that'tis the Womens Fault if they
don't make themselves as much belov'd as they
please; and that if they had but the Wit t6 make a
right Use of their Advantages, there is ne'r a Man
in the World whom they might not eafdy manage
with a tingle Thread. She mightily commends
the kind Gentleman,before those Persons whom she
honours with any Share of her Confidence. She
fays he has Charming Transports, and- bewitching Ex-
travagancies; and that whoever is concern'd with
him, ought to kL-,w when his different Sallies of
Paflion and Tenderness come in ;and that he is the
Easiest Man in the World, if but rightly humor'd.
imagine You heard this Discourse deliver'd in a

trcmblinlg

trembling broken Voice, and coming from a- Mouth,
where not a Tooth, or the least Remainder of one is
to be seen: She thinks that this Cudgeling has set
the Clock of her Life Twenty Years backward, and
inercilefly intuits the relt of her own Age, that
have not Merit enoughto defervea Drubbing. This,
I find, has made some of them as jealous as Furies.
So they take all the Pains in the World to underva-
lue the Merit of the Favours which Ihe has so lately
receiv'd. One of her Neighbours, who is her Con-
temporary, and, what is more, one that envies her
from the Bottom of her Heart, told me, when her
Gallant thrath'd her, he was just come from the Cho-
colate-Houfe, where he had loft all his Money i and
that in the Heat of this ill Humour he had laid his
Cane upon this charming Person: That as for the
Lanthorn, it was not he, but an ill-contrived Rogue
ofa Lacquey that broke it. Thus You may fee, Sir,
what strange things Envy will make some People
talk; and with what Artifice and Subtilty it endea-
vours to lessen every thing that makes for the Ho-
lour of its Neighbour: Nay, even the Men are an-
gry with our poor Spark for employing his Cudgel so
nwvortbily, as if a' Man were not allowed to use it
where and when he saw fit; but was oblig'd to give
the Publik an Accountof everyWomrha's Age whom
he vouchsafed to chaftize. So that according to
this Do&rine, if in one of your amorous Transports
You shou'd happen to fdllfoul upon some amiable
Old Gentleman, the World has a Right to censure
those Favours as ill beftwed, and blame You for not
making them light upon a Younger Back. Now,in
Truth,this is very hard Dealing; but the People
ofthis Age are so ill-conditiond, that there's no
pleajing them. Farewel, Sir: Make a right Use of
this Example use your Cane difcreetly,and be sure
to renember, that when a Woman has once seen
Twenty five,fhe does not deserve to be saluted with
it.

7~

To lMonjfieur de C--- pon a Friend's refol.

ving to mary anR Old Woman.
THIS comes to acquaint You that our Friend

I S-- -, notwithstanding all the Advice of
his Friends to the contrary,is refolvedto marry Ma-
dam D**. Allthe Re.ason that he can give forfo
doing, is, that he is poor and the Lady has a thou-
sand Pounds a Year. Well then, do You think this
a sufficient Rcafon ? I presume you don't; for there
is ne'era single Feature about her,that does not want
the above-mention'd Sum to keep it in Repair. If
Want of Beauty implies Want of Fortune, she is the
poorest Woman upon the Face of the Earth. I wou'd
villinglyknow what method he takes to delude her.
In the firfr place, I take it for granted, that his De,
sign upon her must be wicked: And tho' inch a'Re,
fo!utionin my Opinion,is not eafie to take, yet since
he has fallen upon it, I long to know what Success
he has had in his Pretensions. I have heard this Me-
r.erble Perfrn often fay, That Heaven knew her
Heart, she had no Design to marry again: But that
if ihe was predeftinated to commit such a Folly the fe-
cond time (arid Widows, by the bye, are mighty
Sticklers for Predestination ) she would at least take
care not to chufe that Man for her Husband who
should propose nothing else to himself but to make
himself Matter of her Estate; buit one that had a
real and sincere Consideration for her Person. I own
this Word Consideration was a modest Word;
but in the Ladies Difsionary it signified Love: And
since Satan has put it into her Ladihip's Head to
make a Diftindion between her Estate and Person, I
can't imagine what Method a Man can take to fa-
tisfie her that he has a Fancy to the Former, and not
at all to the Latter. Call fofuperannuated a Piece of

Mot.

Mortality believe, that flie has any Merit to boast of;
e.clfiuve of her Thousand FPounds a Year; or is fh
so vain as to think that the World looks upon her
Acres to be nothing but an Appendix to her other
perle&ions ? What, has fie ne'er a Looking-glas ill
her House, to convince her of her Mifiake ? Have
her Uentlecwoman and her. breillng-Maid, her Chaplain,'
Steward, and her Butler, her Cok-Maid and hsr Gar-
dinerher Coacbman and her Groom, have they, all con-
spired to abure her, and keep her in Ignorance ? It al-
mnrt makes me mnd to think on't. For Heaven's
fake, what can be the meaning of foftraige ani iifd-
tuation? But, to return to our Friend, whatever
Sirs he may have to answer for, Iam fire he ought
not to be tax'd witl Cowardice. Bless ale ! to have
the lb:pudence to throw himfelfat an old Painted
aowdy's Feet, and there to tell her in a fcouindtii
whining Tone,that the Divine Lutire of her Eyes foi--
sooth has burnt Uis Heart to a Coal ; That her Comn
pay is Heaven to him, and her Absence the greatelf
Hell in fIhort, that his Life, his Happiness, his All
depends upon the Sentence of her Celestial Lips Td
fay all these Sottifli Flattei'ies, and do all these aoick-
ed things, is certainly above any Man's attempting,
lut one that has the Courage ofHerculei. For my
part,I cou'd sooner run up to the Mouth dfa annoni
leap down a Precipice, or, what is iorife tie lip my
right Leg behind me, and beg upon a Bridge, tha'ii
reconcile my self to such little Pra&ices. , Infieadof
loading my teader Conscience with so many horrid
Lies, I wou'd h ncRly tell her Ladilhip, that I was
most wonderfully in love with her Bags and her A-
cres; and that if she would be pleas'd to make me
Master of them, he shou'd find ine a complaifarnt
grateful Drudge to the End of the Chapter; But the
Devil a Syllable wou'd I tell her of her Beauty. I
Wou'd moreover take Occasion to inform her, that
le was bound in Hoaour, and all that, to marry me,

, ,K -

because I did not go about to banter her as the reft
of her humble whining Raskals did, who pretended
to be smitten with her irrefiltible Charms. A Wo.
man of good Sense and Discretion, if fuch.a Monster
as that is to be found above-groundwou'd be better
pleas'd, one wou'd think, with so frank an Acknow.
ledgment,thin with all thofeFulfome Compliments;
of which the common Herd of Lovers are so profuse,
You will tell me perhaps, that above three Parts in
four of the Women are Fools. Why, so they may
be: however, I am such a good-natur'd Fool to be-
lieve they are not altogether so foolifi as we make
them. Besides, to open my self further to you,there
areJome People in the World, whom, as wicked as I
am, I fhou'dmake a Confcienceto cheat. 'Tis fonme
pleasure to putfalfe Dice upon a cautious folernu
Coxcomb, that flands eternally upon his Guard; But
what kind of Satisfa&ion can it be,to angle for Gud.
geons,that will swallow a Hook without a Bait ?

When you write to me next, pray fend me word
whether the above-mention'd Lady be not a down-
right Natural: For' if ihe is not, I am resolved to
renounce all manner of Acuaintance with our Friend:
For if he has Cunning enough to perfwade her
that he is in love with her Person, he must certain.
ly be the molt dangerous Impostor in the World;
and an Impostor, as I take it, is none of the fittest
Men to make a Companion.

Tke End of Letters Seriogs and Comical,

A
*

r 3
A
DECLAMATION

In Defence of
W=-- =-and Gaming,

AGAINST
ila^ t ftrre r
Written in Latin by Beroald;w, made Englift

by 'ho. Brown.
The ARGU MENT;
'AFather had three Sons, one a foitlmafter, anothe'r

Datamrler, and the third a 2Dluntairb: being sick, he
made this Will, That the most wicked of his Sons
fliould be disinherited. He being dead, they go to
Law, rwhich of 'em was by this Will diinherited: 7'he
Cause is heard before the 7udges by y ay of mutualAc-
tufation of each other ; the MDumnkarf having made
his Defente, the other two give the following Anfwerr

S
0[ Pst, that admirable Deliverer of fine Mo-
Fr,' rals in pieafing Fables, (most Reverend

J udges) tells us, That Men are funiffi'd
,itoh two Wallets, one hanging before, and t'other

K 2 behind:
- -- -

behind: That we put our Neighbour's Follies and
Vices in that which hangs before; and hide our
own in that which is, more out of the way, behind.
In which ingeniousApologue he,witll a great deal of
Wifdonm and Knowledge, informs us, that mortal
Men have a Hawk's Eye in the discovery of the least
Blister or Scar in their Neighbours, but are as blind
as Moles in their own Vicers and unseemly Blotchcs;
extreamly iharp-fighted in other Peoples Pecadilloes,
but purblind in their owngreatcft Defc~s: That no.
body looks back into the Wallet behind, as if of no
-concernto 'em. This,tho' of commonExperience,
yet has never been more visible and evident, thanin
our Brother's pleading before this Honourable Ben;ci
this day, who being very fhort-figilted in his own
Aftair, has difcover'd so sharp an Eye in ours,
while he he could fee a M,lote'ein or Eyes, but. not a
Beam in his owi: ; who has been very copious and
eloquent against the aImjotnnaftc and nRmeflkr,
but has endeavoured to prove aDttnltinn£f. (his
peculiar and beloved Vice )- not only pardonable,
but very plcafantly defends it, as a Quality ex-
treamly worth our acquiring, and meriting the
greatest Applause.

But we flall not presume to banter this Honoura-
ble Bew;c with such an Absurdity, nor put a gloss
upon our Errors, or cover our Warts; but shall in-
genuoufly confess, that both Gaming and WVorini
are really Evils : But all we contend for is, that
Drunkeninefs is yet a greater Evil than these; and
this we hope to make good by the most evident Ai-
guments and Demonstrations: We only most hum-
bly beg Tour Lordfips to ilew us the fame Favour
you have our Brother; and as with a patient and
equitable Ear you have given attention to his In-
vedives against his Brothers, you will with the fame
Benignity and Consideration liften to our Reply
and excusable Recrimination ; That if he has gra-

tified

tified himself with any ill-natur'd Pleasure in his
Raillery, he may lose that SatisfaEion in hearing
his own Follies expos'd in their proper cólours;
who having taken the liberty of faying what he
pleas'd, may be oblig'd, without any Injustice, to
hear what he has no mind to. 'Tis your Business,
most Reverend lJdges, when you have heard both
fides, and compar'd and nicely weigh'd our Follies
and Vices, to make such a Decree as shall to Tour
WiJfdons seem molt equitable and iuft.

To begin from the Root of the Cause: Man, con-
silting of Body and Sotul, knows nothing more near
and dear to him than bimjflf; whence it comes to
)pas, that the chief Object of his Care and Concern
is, to preserve the Health of his Body and Mind,
that he maybe Mens fana in Corpore fano, a found
Mind in a found Body.; and to adjust, first of all,
and make agree those things which the Greeks call
7i p:7d OU'nMOx, and the Latins, Prima Nature, or
Primogenia, i. e. the First or Primitive Things of Na-
ture ; in which number are plac'd Health, the Inte-
grity of the Senres, and the Preservation of all the Partsi
which most Men make the Measure and Rule of
the Sammum Bonum, or Supream Good: And since
Prudence is the proper A& of Life, and which makes
the greatest and motl valuable figure among the
Goods of the Mind, our first and chief Care ought
to be the Prerervation of that, left we foolishly quit
the method and means of Living,

Since therefore this Health and Safety of the
Body and Mind is the most precious and valuable of
all things in Nature, since the Goods of the Mind
and Body are allow'd to be the greatest of Sublunary
Goods, is there any Man so wilfully blind, as not to
esteem that, by much, the greatest Vice and Folly,
which destroys the most valuable of Human Goods ?
But'tis most plain and evident, all there susser the
greatest shock by Drunkennea, and grow dull and

'
A .heavy

heavy by the perpetual Inundation of Wine. Drun-
kennefs obscures the Mind in dark Clouds and fufflT
cating Fogs of unwholfome Vapours; drives away
the Health and Robustness of the Body, and is at
once the Rock,on which both our Substance and Re-
putation susser Shipwreck. 'Tis an old Proverb,
That a drunken General is a bad Commander in the Day
of Battel, iice Wine throws a Mitt over his Con,
duc, and enervates the Vigour, which is neceffiry
for the Onset. This gives us an Idea of the Wisdom
of the Ancients in the Meaning of their Words,
especially such as were compound, for they call'd
Wine Temetum cyod teneat Mentem, ac lentet, from
being a Clog and Impediment to the Mind, and
bent to Evil: Hence also is Drunkenness call'd Te,
mulentia.

What, 0 ye Yudges, is there more scoundrel?
What more beastly, than a Manl depriv'd of his
Manhood, rob'd of his Senses by an Inundation of
Claret? He knows not himself, and has no more
tInderflanding than an old Fellow in his Doatage,
or a Child of two Months old; the Health of the
Mind is walh'd away by the Flood of good Liquors,
and a total Forgetfulness of all things ensues, and
the perfec Death of the Memory. The Mind of a
DiA.nk.rd, drown'd in Wine, and vanquifh'd in
Ebriety, is not in his own power, which never is
the Fare of either the VWhoremafrer or Ga'meifer; and
asSeneca, the mofl ievere Censor of Drzelkards,
flys, Drunkenness is only a voluntary Madness. Is
there, can there be any greater and more fcanda-
lous Shame in Nature, than that a Man should be
pleas'd and delighted with afpontancom and volun-
tf'ry Delirium, whose greatest Good is to be in his
true Senses, and enjoy a perfec Health of Mind ?

In Dru;kennefs we find a Vertigo of the Brain, all
things turn round, the Head swims, the House
whirls abouyaand the Feet reel: For as Plaunts wit-

tily

tily remarks, Wine is a cunning Wrestler, that
first trips up the Heels; and Androclides, eminent
for his Wisdom, justly obferv'd, that as Hemlock
is Poyfon to a Man, so Wine is to Hemlock ; intima-
ting by this, that Wine was even Poyfon to Poyfon.

Who is ignorant how many'Diftempers arise out
of intemperate Drinking ? for hence come running
Eyes, weak Nerves, trembling Hands, malignant
Fevers, ulcerous and gouty Feet, a stinking Breath,
and a thousand more which I might here enume-
rate; so that we may with a great deal of Justice.
fay, tDiunennef is clofefollow'd by its Companion Pain.

'Tis evident that Wine is of a very injurious na-
ture to human Bodies, when the use of it is by the
Physicians always forbid in our Distempers, as if
that were the Food and Fuel of the Disease.

We may add to these Evils of Drinking, which
we have mention'd already, that the Man who is a
Devotee to that, is but a very bad Husband of his
Aftairs, while he ruines his Estate in the purchase
of Wines from all parts of the World, and pays the
Vintner for odd and whimsical Names triple the va-
lue of the Liquor, while he values Wine more than
Gold, and is more pleas'd to look on a sparkling
Glass, than on the Beams of the all-cheering Sun.
Every Day furnishes us with Examples (tho' in a
matter so notorious, so known to all Men, particular
Instances are not neceflary) of Men who have
brought themselves to Beggary by Drinking at so
expensive a rate; its Force and Extortion is so
great, that it turns the Head, and begets Madness z
There is no more obvious Argument of its Infamy,
than that it is us'd in common Abuse, as the last
and most despicable Exprobration that can be
made to any Man; nor could 1omer's Achilles find
out any more 1hameful Reproach to throw at Aga-
wemnon, than that he was iVOCeal, i.. one laden
ith Wine,. The Mother of St, 4fIin, formerly be-

4 ing

ing by her Maid upbraided and call'd in the height
or her Anger a Wineb`boer, was Io f.och d at the 'in,
famous Raillery, that she left o- Vine, and only
mix'd Water with it for the .utre.

Examine, mojt Equitable Judges, the Opinions of
all Men, make Enquiry ofevery one, and you will
scarce be able to find so much as One, whl- had not
rather be call'd a WliorenmaJ2er or.Gamcfler, than a
Dnrnkaird. Of so general and receiv'd Infamy is a
Vice so abominable and fenfiefs.

Let us add to this the Confileration of how many
Quarrels, even among the nearest and deeti
Friends; how many Murders-and abandon'd Wic-
kednefNesahave Men committed in their D:,'i;n;
which they might well (tho' in vain) wilhl undlne
when the Bcchanaian Fury was .over, (for rV";.,
as it is iil Esdras, /ed'icSs the Mi;d, t;d the d; .';h.;
Man takes up the Sword) who comnii: t?' tl'er!ei .-:
and riling as it were from a flhort Ibrt of i-:, re-
mrenmber not anyv of their . i Jnas ?
. ct us iifta ce
in A!e.x.nder the Grear:. gr
w.hom mv good t:n:t- r
hut now made his boafLts, Did hie not fab his beht
Friend Ct;ltzs in the heat of his GCups ? Perfpoii
fell a Sacrince to the heat of his Iiquor, and many
of his mot iiltimate Favourites felt in their Deaths
the Frenzy of his Wine. Nor is this recorded by
Hi';VrimaJs as a Precedent for Drun';ar'dsasa you vin-
iv and weakly imagine, but to deter all ?ieni from
the.fhameful Vice thaE had produc'd such fatal E-
vents. Let us fee what Slalughtrs publick De-
bauches have brought forth il this kindI 'tis this has
betray'd the mofit Warlike Nations into thp hands
of their Enemies; this has brought under a foreign
Yoke the moit obstinate and impatient of Thral-
dom; this has vanquifh'd those, that could not be
overcome in Battel.

Thus the Syracuf#ans fell into the hands of Marcel-
's and the Jurisdiction of the Romans thus the

** *
** **
*- '. '* : * * M 4h

~ agfiagetes, drown'd in Wine, were routed and
pnade captive by the Persians: What Vice therefore,
O Equitable Yudges, can be more infamous, foul and,
shameful than DrukennfsJ ? It.aflaults the Health of
the blind, destroys the ViSor of the Body, waftes the
Estate, and finks the Repuration ;of wlich the Cin-
sequences are Quarrels, rMurders, unheard-of Wic-
kednefs, and.even the Extirpation of Nations.

Our Life is a perpetual Refutation of the Stoick's
Paradox, which fiews more of Cunning, than
Truth, viz. That all Sins are equal. This is contrary
to Common Sense, and our Vices too visibly contra-
di& it, whose Inequality, and greater and lefler de-
gree of Mischief is obvious to every one. Thus 'tis
apparent, even to the Blind, that Drunkenness is by
so much the more odious and abominable than Whore-
dom ain Gaming, by how much more valuable and
precious Goods are deftroy'd by the former, than by
the 1ater.

But to comply as much as poflible with you, out
of Bt,.tcrly Love, and depart a great deal from
those Ad rvantages which we have, let us allow you,
that D;runkenness in all other things is a less Evil
than! ;Iorinf or Gaming; let us grant Fornication
and Dice more-abandon'd Vices in all other things,
yet you must be compel'd to allow this whether you
will nr nrt, That Drunkenness overclouds the Wit
and Und-rcrftanding, that it makes all the Senses
languifl, and puts a Man out of his own Power and
Conduc; by which ConcefTion, which you cannot
yet deny, 'tis evident that iteory declares of our
fide, since nothing is eqlual to this very Vice alone,
and nothing wicked and odious enough to demand
the second place; Suppose you make what Com-
pound you please of our Vices, yet you will not be
able to prove, but that we are always Cornpos mentis,
Alafters of Common Sense and Underitanding;
)whiclh Drutkezmnef inyou shocks and throws into a.

per-

perfec Delirium; but in this Madness, and the
Shipwreck of the Mind and Senses, a Man loses the
Name of Man, and voluntarily casts away that on-
ly diftinfion betwixt the Human and Brutal kind,
which must render him the most abandon'd, most
fliameful, and molf infamous of Men, if he yet
deserve that Name.

As for the Praise my Brother has been pleas'd to
befrow on l'ine,agreeing with the Opinion of Acle.
piades, That it almost equals the Power of the Gods,
he fights with a Bulrzlj,not a Sword, since we are not
averse to Wine, and drink it with pleasure; for'tis
not Win7e,but excess of it,which we contend against.
We are sensible there are two Liquors extreamly
grateful to human Bodies, Wine within, and Oyl
without; Wine for the Stomach, and Oyl to anoint
the Limbs. We allow, that nothing contributes
more to the ftrengthning our Bodies, than Wine, ta-
ken with Moderation; we know very well, that
Wine refrefles the Stonmch, whets the Appetite,
abates the edge of our Cares, expels Cold, and in.
vites Sleep, but all tlefe Advantages are confin'd to
& very moderate and extreamly-temperate Use of
it; that Excurlion therefore in the Praise of tine
no body denies: But however, what Excuse, what
Justification can thence be drawn for Drunkenness,
or the Drunkard, who is the Subje& of our present
Debate ? Does the Excellence of Wine juftifie his
perverting it to the mofl infamous Defe& ? Can a-
ny Authority defend him ? What, will you venture
to Ihelter your self under the shield of Plato whom,
as the drunken Advocate of-Drunkennefs, you have
falfly quoted? For you must know, my very good
Brother, that he is far from praising, or authoriz-
ing by a Law, that odious Ebriety, which uses to'
weaken and make languid Mens Minds and Under-
sandings, the Guilt of which is this day laid to
your Charge; but he would by this Law let is know,

thlat

that he does not condemn sometimes a little larger
and more pleasant Carouse at set Banquets, under
the government and direcion of some certain pru-
dent and fober Sympofirrchs, or Masters of the
Feasts. But that you may know how far the Plito-
nick Laws are from countenancing or authorizing
Drunkenness, that it is to the greatest degree con-
demn'd by him, give a little Attention to what we
shall fay.
This Philosopher orders only a little meer Wa-
ter for Boys, and wholly interdics the use of IVne
to them, as adding Fire to Fire. The fame Philo-
fopher commands a new-married Pair, both Bride
and Bridegroom, to apply themselves wholly to the
getting an Offspring, and to be very abstemious,
that the Conception be solid and quiet, because
Drunkards, like Mad-men and Fools, are not proper
for Generation; ince 'tis very probable that, firom
a drunken Man's Coition, the Child would proceed,
bath in Limbs'and Motion, crooked and untoward.
As for your boas of imitating Hercules, Alexam-
der, and Cato, telling us, that the firit was a good
drinker, the second Drank, and the third apt to raise
ip his Spirits with Wine; give me leave, good Bro-
ther,to ask you one civil Question upon this Head:
Wou'd you really imitate these great Men or no ?
Would you place them and their Lives and Ations
before you for an Example to follow, and a Copy
to write after ? If you will, pray let your Imitation
he compleat, follow 'em closely thl;o their whole
Lives, tread in the Iteps of their Virtues-and excel-
lent Qualities, as well as in their Frailties. Let us
fee you, like Hercules, free the Earth of Monsters;
equal Alexander in the Wonders of his Acquisitions
and Acions, and come up to the Sanaity, the In-
tegrity of the Manners of Cato, then we lhall allow
Ebriety as excusable in you, as it was in them; then
no body would Molest you ; then our Suit with you:

for

for our Paternal Inheritance would be at an End;
we shou'd of our own accord give way to the Good;
we should give up the Cause to Merit, and you
shou'd, without any hazard, hear the Contest be.
twixt me and my other Brother, for our share of
the Estate, allowing yours not fit to come into the
Controverfie. But what a Perverseness, Impiety,
and Iniquity is thisof Yours, which makes you like
there great Heroes in their Vices, but most unlike
'em in their Virtucs; which makes you desire to
follovw'cm in what ihould be avoided, and flul
'em in what you ought to follow 'en ; to imitate
'em in their evil Deeds, but have no regard tc their
o-od ? If you are pleas'd with Cato in his Cups, be
pleas'd likewise with him in his Frugality, Gravity,
Integrity, L.arning, Mannei s, and all his other admi-
rblc Ertfzes, otf -lrch he is propcs'd as the Rdle)
Az:tlor, and Ex.amile.

But you mufti not think these great AMen like you,
returning every day to their Vomit, Spending your
whole Life, day after day, in the mad thoughtless
Revels of B.:acc;us; for Virtues and Vices, lo oplpo0
rt.s in their Nature, could never inhabit the Breafs
of thiofe great Men, but they indulg'd a Glass now
and then, to rouze 'em up from their perpetual La-
bours and Fatigues, which Day and Night em-
plov'd either their Body or their Thoughts, whose
Pecadilloes are hid in their Virtues ; to which, Iince
you have not the least laudable Ambition of a-
ipiring, for fliame never pretend to support your
Infamy by their Examples, whose Virtues you are
so far from attaining, that you don't so much as
desire 'em.

Cease, cease to boast ofthofe, whose Authority
you have fondly ventur'd to produce in yourde-
'fence, because they only make your Cause worse,
more ihameful and infamous, than if you had not
nam'd 'em. But we are really furpriz'd to find,

tha,.

that you have in your Lift forgot Tiberiru CeJfar,
since the Pra&ice of one of the greatest of the Roman
Emperors would have brought some seeming Force
to your Cause, who from his excessive drinking of
Wine was call'd Biberim Claudiu 'Mero, instead of
Tiberi. Clautdin, Nero; who made Pifo Prefea of
Rome, for fitting out his Hand at the Bottle for
two Days and two Nights without interruption.
But Examples, tho' they are never so illustrious, of
vicious Men are 'more prejudicial to the Person
guilty of the fame Crime than beneficial; for their
UAs are a perpetual Monument of their Folly, and
for ever Condemn their Cause.

But, most Equitable Judges, if, in Excuse or De-
fence of our Vices,we may be allow'd the Authority
of Princes in their. Pra&ice, we are able to produce
not a few Emperors guilty of those we too justly
tand accus'd of; for History aflures us, that Augu-
ftrs Cefar, who was efteem'd a God even in his life-
time, than whom none. was thought greater or
better on Earth, was very fond of Dice, and the
Emperor Claudius made a Book of the Art of Dice,
of which he was so great an Admirer, that'he
would play even as he rode in his Coach or Litter.
But for Whoremasters, there have been a thousand
Patrons; Solomon, who was the wisest of Men, as
holy Writ afrures us, had almost innumerable
Troops of Concubines ; and Cigfar the Di&atorwas
call'd Every Woman's Huband.

But 'tis not our purpose to pretend to wafli out
our own Offences by the Examples of great Ti-
tles, and of Men of the first figure in the World;
nor Ihall we make use of even that Defence, which
without doubt carries with it the greatest force and
power of any, as if we fIould urge, that there is
nothing in nature so necessary as Venereal Coition,
which being banifh'd the Earth, all the various
kinds of Animals,that render the Earth so glorious,

would

142 A Declamation inDefence of
would soon came to nothing, and certainly perili,
Let Venus, (to use the Words of Seneca) leave Man-
Kind's Affairs, and the wrhole World would be negleUed
amd uncultivated. Take from human Commerce
Meretrician Amours, you would find a horrid Con-
fitfion of all things, and incestuous Lusts diffurb
every Family.

'Tisofno use in this Cause before you, most
Reverend Judges, to urge, That Dice are the sea-
soning of a Life of Pleasure, the Delight of the
Mind, with which Men deceive the Hours, in their
cool Retreats from the burning heats of the Clime
or Season, which they make use of after Dinner, for
the fake of their Health, when all Agitation of Bo-
dy and Application of Mind is of no Advantage in
the Opinion of the belt Physicians. But we pre-
tend to draw no force to our Cause from any of
these things, but we fairly and plainly do acknow-
ledge, that we are criminal, we are viciowr; but then,
without all doubt, we must atert, that our Brother
is more criminal, and more viciosa. And this we
have, in our Opinion, thus far prov'd by Argu-
ments of the highest probability: But, that this
may be more evident to you, that the Filthiness osso
great a Vice be made yet more aplarent, and set in
a better light; in flort, that not the Icaft Scruple
remain in your Minds, but that a Drunkard is far
more criminal, and guilty of a Vice fir more odious
and infamous than a Whoremaster or Gamester, we.
Thall in this place endeavour to convince you.

But because our Adversary has attempted to for.
tifie himfelfby Examples, and the Opinions and Sen-
tences of Authors of the first Forms, we ihall there-
fore in the fame manner evince by Examples, and
the Saying of Philosophers, Oratours, and Church-men,
that Drunkenness was by the wisest and best of the
Ancients efteem'd always deteitable, and declaim'd
against with the utmoit Reproaches, as a Vice of

the

the molt pernicious consequence. And lince these
things will not be unpleasant to be known, or un-
useful to be told, or to be rejected by the Ears of
the Learned, we hope, as you have hitherto heard
us with attention, that you will continue so to do in
what we have yet to fay.

The frugal Lacedemonians, under the happy
Laws and Inititutions of Lycurgis, designing to de-
ter their Youth from Ebriety, as from a most base,
mean, and servile thing, took this Method on their
Festival Days; they caus'd some of their Slaves the,
Helotes to be brought into the Refe&ories Drunk,
that feeing the ridiculous Figure, the fantaftick
A&ions, the bestial Ignorance, and all the filthy
Effeds of Excejjive Drinking, they should have a
perfec abhorrence of a Vice, which, like the Cup
of Circe, threw off the human, and put on the brutal
form. Plato, Aristotle, Eusebius, and the greatest of
Phyicians,Galen, have given a unanimous Applause
to that Carthaginian Law, which forbid all Wine
during the Campaign, ordering all to abstain from
it during all Warlike Expeditions, as softening and
rendring 'em unfit for Labour and Fatigue. Cifar,
in his Commentaries, informs us, that the Suevi, a
People of Germany, utterly forbid the importation
of Wine, believing it would enervate their Bodies,
and destroy their Strength. The Stoic Chremon
relates, that the ancient Egyptain Priests always
abftain'd from'Wine and Flelhi, from the time that
they addrefs'd themselves to the Divine Worlhip;
that the Senses, unclogg'd with Vapours, and
Fumes, might be more robust and sprightly. A-
mong the Romans, and through all the Latin Ter-
ritories the Women were Exemplarily abstemious
all their Lives; that is, they drank no Wine, nay,
if we may believe Dionysus, in his Book of Antiqui-
ties, if they ,were caught drinking Wine, they
were put to death: And fonle of our celebrated

Latin.

Latin Writers have deliver'd it as a Truth, That
the Wife of Ignativ', who hid drank some Wine out
of the Cask, was Kili'd by her Husband, and he ac.
quitted of the Murther by Romull. Fab:u Pretor
tells us in his Ainn.ls of a Lady that was starv'd to
death by her Relations,. for having the Keys of sier
Wine-cellar in her Pocket. Cneiis1 Domittis being
Judge, condemn'd a Worman tothe forfeitureof
her Dowry, for drinking WVine without her Hue-
band's Knowledge; for this reason, if we credit at,
and from him Tcrtc-lliai, in his Apologetick, the
Friends and Relations of the Wonlan kifs her, t
find whether she has been drinkil'g Wine. And in'
deed, it mufi be confefs'd,tlhat the inoidinate ufeof
[ine shuts the Door fast againfL all Virtue, but sets
it wide open to all manner of Vice. Apollonios
T'y.nM,) a Man of the first Chara&er among the
Heathens, was a Water-drinker, fearing and shun-
ning IVinc, as the Bane of the Underitanding. St.
Hicrom dirccis his Ci)riftian Virgin to avoid Wine,
as Poison ; he likewise makes almost a total Inter-
discion of it to the Pricfthood, (which we hope they
obferv'd better in his days than ours) who writing
to Nepotian, Nev>er, fays he, firer your Breath to have
the fromzy Hlavtgozvft of Wi e, left you fiJould be liable
to that Rebuke of the Philosopher, This s not to offera
'ifs, but a Glass. One of the chief and most scan-
dalous Objeftions of Cicero to Pifo, ind which
he urges as the greatest Reproach, is, that being a
eternal Guzzler of WVinc, his Mouth smelt like
Vintners Vault. But, not to accumulate Examples
from prophane History, God himself in Levitital
fvs thus to Aaron the High-Prieft; Wine, (fays he)
and all thar can inebriate, thou flhalt not drinkj nor thy
Ss5. s, when you enter the 7Tabernacle, left you die. Thus
likewise the Follower of God, the Vrfel of EteWion,
and the Bulwark and Defence of the h! lv Serivvres,
St. P:1u the Apostle, condemning the Debaucles of

the
0

the'Bottle, in his Epistle to Timothy, declares, That
a BiJflopflould befober, and not at allgiven to drinking:
And hence that memorable pafnage in the Canoni-
cal Decrees, That the Apostle condenl]s, and the
old Law forbids a Priest much drinking. The
Pricits that minister in the Temple or Church of
God are forbidden Wline and Strong Drink, left their
Hearts and Spirits be overburthen'd with Surfeits
and Ebrietyv.

Before the Flood Men were fober, and abftemi-
ous in their Liquors, the use of the Vine not being
found out, nor any Vineyard planted; after the
Flood, as we find it in holy Writ, Noah wasthe
firit who planted a Vineyard, and drinking of the
Juice of theGrapes, became drunk; so that Wlne did
not f much as/pare the Author of its being. We find
llkerie in the Pentateuch, that Wine was the Cause of
Incet, the Daughters of Lot having made him drunk
ith Wine, drew hi:n into the abominable At of
Incest: From which time the heat of Wllne has in-
vaded mortal Men with Faiy, that Fury with Drun-
ennefs, and in Ebriety Modesty is loft, and then
mpudence, which ensiles, produces Incest, and all
manner of monstrous ConjunCtions: From this time
Vine began to affe& the Minds of Men with various
nd different Motions, so that some grew quarrel-
ome and frantick; others pleafanc, facetious, and
alkative ; others drowsy and sleepy; others maud-
in, and full of Tears ; for WiVne has the fame force
sblack Choler, that is, various and manifold, on
hich we have an excellent and noble Problem of
the moit celebrated Philosopher Aristotle, from
which Horace seems to have borrow'd the begin-
ning of the Twenty-firft Ode of his Third Book:

0 Nate mecum confute Manlio, &c.

L O!
5,

O . charming Cask of Sprightly Wine,
those Life bears ceual Date with Mine;
Born both upon the Latian fiare,
W[I.en Manlius Rome's great Taxes bore;
Wlhither from thee Complaints ariJfy
Or [[it around the Table flies,
Or jarring Oirrels intervene,
Orfickly Love, or biting Spleen,
Or from thy friendl, Vapours creep
Vp.in my Temples eaie Sleep, &c.
Dioniyf)4, vulgarly call'd Bacchus, (whom the
Heathen TWriters make the Inventer of the Grape)
is feign'd to be horn'd; not so much because he
brought Oxen to the Yoke, ( as Diodorus believ'd)
as that Men over-pofrefs'd with the Spirit of Wine,
by its force, are rais'd up to any Raffhnefs imagina-
ble, and are made impetuous, and as it were arm'd
with Horns to defend or afrault: Then is the Poor
Man's Horn exalted, then forgetting his humble fate
and Poverty, he admits the Insinuations of Pride, and
swells with the empty Imaginations of his orin
lftork.

As for that vain and insignificant Boast of our
Brother's, That Bacchus was made a God, a Vine-
yard-keeper, a Constellation, that does not afford
the least help, nor bring the weakest Buttress to his
Cause; but if the Fiftions of the Poets may serve
for Arguments, and be allow'd a good Defence, let
us likewise have the advantage of the like Inftan-
ces; let us remember that our Veenw is the brightest
Star in the Firmament, that she exercises her Au-
thority among the very Gods and Goddefles, by
whose Nature or Influence all things are born on
Earth,whom the noft celebrated Authors of Fables
call The Pleasure of Gods and Men.

To

To these let us add Anacharfis, who was born to
Wifdor among the barbarous and dull Scythians; he
tells us, that the Vine bears Three forts of Grapes,
the first of Pleasure, the second of Drunkenness, and
the third of Contumely. c/fop, the Author of the
Fables, is said to'have exprefs'd himself much after
the fame mrannrer The Obfcrvation of Anachrfif,
A//p, or any oth:r wife Man ( for its real Author
is not much to the import of the faying) is, That at
dinner the first Cup is offer'd to 'Thrri, the second to
Mirth, the third to Pleasure, but the fourtb to Madinefs.
But if the fourth Cup makes the Drinkers mad,
what will four times four, nay, forty Cups do ?
Must they not drive 'em beyond all manner of other
Maddnefs, and make 'em what we call stark mad?
But 'tis evident by great Drinkers, that the more
they drink, the more they thirlt; and the more
they use themselves to drink, the mire they covet
it; so that they seem a Generation of Men born on
purpose for the dcftrution of Wine. Nive/ius of
Milan drinking off near four gallons at a draugllt,
was not afham'd of the Sirname he acquir'd by it,
of 7Ticongizs, or Three-gallons, seeking as it were
an awkard fort of Glory from his Vice. And since
every Vice is so much the greater,as the Person that
commits it is more eminent in his Station and Dig-
nity, what Title of Infamy can we give Bonofus the
Ro.man Emperor, (whom I wonder my Brother
Ihould omit in his Lift of Royal Drunkards ) who
excell'd all Mankind in Drinking, of whom Aure-
lianus was wont to fay, That he wpa not born to live,
blit to drink ; who being vanquifh'd by Bobus, when
he had made his Exit in a Halter by his own hands,
gave rife to this Sarcasm, That not a Man but a
Hojflcad was hanging up. Solomon cries aloud,
Wine is luxurious, and Ebriety tumultuous, and who-'
ever is delighted swith these, can never be wife. T11e
fame cautions us, not to be in the Feasts. of Drunkards.

L I could

I could not but fuiile, my Lords, when I heard
my Brother but now calling those incontinent and
intemperate who are Votaries of Venus, the fame time
confirming it out of Aristotle's Problems, as if Ari-
s'otle had only call'd Men inclin'd to Women in-
continent and intemperate. But, my good Brother,
pray do us the favour to repeat the whole Problem
of A-iftotle, and then you will find your self under
the fame Censure, and incurring the fame Deno-
mination. But to make this plain, my Lords, you
mult recollet, that this most eminent of all the Phi-
lofophers fays, that since all Pleasure accrues to Man
by his Senfae., all immoderate Pleasure by there Or-
gans is Criminal and Odious; but, fays he, those
which proceed only from the Taste or Touch, are
the mot contenptible of all Pleasures; and, they
who are moif addictec to those two Bestial Plea-
fures, are most gelerally call'd Incontinent, as if
those should be thought but a fort of Brut.s and
Sivgess, who participate chiefly of Delight proper
to 'em ; while the others, whicic proceed from the
other three Senses, seem peculiar to Men. This
is the Sum and Substance of what Ariflotle fays;
from whence it is apparent, that the Pleasure of
7Tqjcy in which that of Drinking must certainly be
included, falls equally under the Censure with the
Pleasure of the Touch, under which the Enjoyment
of the Fair is also plac'd: But every body knows
how ridiculous a thing it is to object thatto another,
which may be immediately retorted against one's
Self.

But before we quit the prosecution of this abo-
minable and odious Vice, let us take a view of the
Deeds of Drunkcnnefs, in the description of which
we shall not make use of our own Words, but those
of Pliny, which ought to be in every one's Mouth,
and in every one's Heart, and are worthy to
be mention'd every where, as well as in his Book,

to

to corre& the inexplicable Avarice of Drink; let
us therefore hear Pliny declaming against the Vices
of Drunkenness in this manner: hen do the voracious
Eyes devour the Matron's Beauty, then are the Secrets
of the Soul betray'd; some make their last V/ills and
Teftamcnts,fpeak things that are the occasion of Death,
and can't hold their peace, even after the flaighter ofma-
ny so that now Truth is vulgarly attributed to Wine:
But the heft of the Lot is, they never fee the rising Sun,
and live afhortcr time than other-wnife they might. Hence
come Paleness and pendulous and skinny Cheeks, run-
ning Eyes, paralitick Hands humbling fiull Cztps; and the
present PmiJlhment they are troubled with, is, disquiet
Nights, and firightful Dreams, the chief Reiard of
Drunkenness, prodigious Lits, and pleasing Wickcdnefs;
the next day they breathfrom theirMouths contarminatling
Scents, have an utter forgetfulness of all things, and a
Death of the Memory. They boast, that they anticipate
Life as it flies; whereas they not only lose the former,
but the coming Day. Is there any so besotted to the
Bottle, which this Discourse of Pliny's (this cenfo-
rial Corre&ion, so severe, so plain, and so true)
cannot reclaim to Sobriety, from the Debauches of
Wine to the Temperance of Water, from the Sup-
pers of Roarers to the Dinners of the Cinicks ? Who
is there that can hear this, can read it, and not fly
from Drunnkennefs as a Pe.S, and execrate the Bottle
with his utmost detefation, as the molt filthy,
scandalous, odious, and infamous of all Vices what-
ever ? What Judge, endow'd with such Authority
and Wisdom as You, my Lords, would not imme-
diately pronounce Sentence against Drunkards and
Ebriety ?

But now I think we ought to found a Retreat,
left while we take the Advantage of the Lex Talio.
nis, the Law of Retaliation, while we recriminate on
the Reproaches and Accusations of our Brother,
while we endeavour to give as good as he brought,

ill

in tallying Crime with Crime, Vice with Vice, and
Folly with Folly, we should seem too violent, and
discover too great a Want of Moderation.

We believe, my Lords, that you have obferv'd
how we have pass'd over in filenc n 'bme Objections
made to us by our Brother, without any Denial or
Refutation: We readily confess, my Lords, that
we are far from denying so plain a Matter of Fad;
for he only whocan boalt himself free from all man-
ner of Falr, cal particularly refute and wipe off
all manner of Scaidal. But we, my Lordc, do
not pretend to deny our Faults, as Innocent, nor
do excuse 'em as many do, nor boast 'em as our Bro-
ther. It is confefs'd, that 'tis a vile .and flumeful
thing to WIhore and Game, the Name of a Whorema-
sier and Gamcefer we ought to blush at: We do by
no means deny, but that both our Faults are infa-
mous and detrimental, and extreamly worthy of
Reproof; but all we contend for, is, 7'hat our Bro-
ther's Vice anid Wickedness exceeds ours. We have
made appear, that Druvnkeniefs does not only wea-
ken our Fame and Elftates, ( which were our Bro-
ther's chief Objections against Is and our Folii.) biut
have with the best Demonstration made it cut, that
Ebriety farther disturbs, shocks, changes and over-
turns the Senses, Understanding, and all the Facul-
ties of the Mind ; than which there can be nothing
more vile and criminal. We have shewn what greit
Slaughters, Destructions, and Funerals Drunkci,?tf
has bronlht o2 Mankind we have likewifi given
you a Lilt of Ex:mucles and A:1th;rities of the molt
excellent Philobophelr aiid Priincs, from whence
_D.iakeinr&~s appe'r-s to have always been the Ob-
ject of their lndi.nation', and in all Ages to have
been condemn'd as the worst of Vices.

As for what remai:s, 2my Lnrds, it is now in your
Breats, it lies upon your 'Prudence and Gravity to
wcalh with Attentionr our several Crimes, and put

'cm

'em as it were in the Balance, and whichever of us
Three shall appear the most vile and infamous Of-
fender, he must be the Subject of your Sentence.

Nor are we under the least Apprehensions in the
world,but that your Judgment will be in our favor.
We can't doubt but that you, my Lords, who are
Men of such eminent Wisdom, will have the fame
Sentiments of things with so many Writers of the
first Rank, and with what Reason it felfperfwades,
Examples fortifie, and Common Sense confirms.
We therefore, my Lords, commit our Cause to your
Prudence and Consciences, and if you plainly know
(as you most certainly do) that Drunknnefs is by
much the more infamous Crime, exclude our Bro-
ther, and by your Sentence absolve Vs, that by your
Favour and Justice we may enjoy our Paternal
Inheritance. Dixi.

The End of the Declamation.

A Con:
LIP -- -

15a
The Continuation of the

QUA KER S SERMON.
Diverting Letters, Billet-

deux, both Originals and Tranflati-
ons, to Gentlemen and Ladies.
Letters of ] N E A s S Y L vrs,

and his Satyr on the Women.
Po CxET-Boo K of Common

Places.
By Mr. THo. BROWN.

M
-- -·I
- ---

155
THE
CONTINUATION

OF THE
QutalIr's Sermon,

Printed in the firfi Volume,
G"OOD God. bless, we beseech thee, thy CbiFrcb^

that are beyond the Seas; root out of themr
all ;tti-C.risian Tyranny of most abominable. Bi.
J6ops; let not those Silk-wvors and Magpies have
Dominion over us but give us our true Primnitive
P.jfrs, Lay-Elders, Reverend Taners, Religious Bas-
ket-makers, Upright Coblers, Coiifcitttious Millers, and
more Cotfiietious Taylors, Refori'd Wlfeavers, and
hliir'd B:room-mntr. Root out of us, thy. Church,
the Rag of Supe;rfitioi, the Swlplice and let not
a Cyp be seen among us, with an Idolatrous Ins
1pon it, The Apostles were Men ignoant andJim-
ple, and so are /'e. Demoliflh the Univerjfties, for
they are Nurseries of vain Iearning ; Greek is a
fleacten Speech, and Latin the Language of the
Eeafl, and all Philoophy is vain. Bless, we beseech
thee, thy Family, and especially our Sifters, that
there may never be' wanting a fruitful Genera-
tioó fpri7rhilg from the Loins of regenerate Parents.
Lastly, We come unto thee for a Bleirlng on our

slCTrr , bless thisTripe, and this Loi, of lVeal, for

Mr 2 it

· I_
13_r

it was a Molten-Calf made IJmraZ to fin this Ca-
pot, 'twas a Cock crowing made Peter repent , this
Turly, altho' no Chriflian Fowl, yet thou ha'ft
rommanded us to pray for all Jews, Turs, Ifdels,
and Hereticks.

And, altlio' we have Hetbew Roots enough, yet
bless these Potatoes and this Cfmard, for the Land
of C.ntaam, flow'd with Alilk and Hoey ; these
Tarts, fbr tly Jsdgments are tart, unlels allay'd
with the Srtgar of thy Alr-cy. Sowfe us, therefore,
in the Pcrde ilng-Tub of thy Mercy that we may
be Tripes fir for thy Heavenly Table. Water us,
yi7g-'Sbrnis, with the Dew of thy BlelEng, that
we may grow up into tall Oaks, and may live to
be faw'd out into De.tl Bo,'.s, to wainfcoat thy
N:ew Jer:;-4alcm. Finally, let this Dinnet improve
and nourish our Bodies, so that we may with
Love and Holiness embrace our Sifters, tc. the
edifying of the-Spirit, in railing up the New
Man2.

Pleasant
_ _·_I_
b ~~~_*

1
Pleasant LETTERS to Gentle-

men. Imitated out of
Monsieur De Pays.

By Mr. Tho. Brown.

To Monsieur de P-
That Women have fold their Favours in all A-

egs of the World, confirm'd by the famous
Story of Lais and Demofthenesd
T
r Ake myWordfor't, Sir, you were exceed-

ingly in the right on't, to refuse bufyig of
Pleasure at so dear a Rate.. When a Man
is so bones as to bellow his Heart upon Philis, ihe
ought to be sent to the Devil for a mercenary Strupi-
pet, if not content with that Present, ihe demands
the fingering of his Purse: For, as Love's Cafuifis,
have long ago regulated the Matter, in Cafe of
Services render'd, the Workman ought to be paid .
and not the Mauser that employs him. I always
told you, if you remember, that this wheedling
young Gypsy loved you for the Ifide of your Poc-
kets, and not for your outward Merits: And since
you have found it by Experience to be true, I hope
you'll take my Word for the future. However don't
be dejeled at the Matter, for you are not the fir]
Man by a Million that has fuffer'd this 1Mifortmne

A a The
__ ·I
·i -I

The Generality of the Sex in all Ages of the World
have set a greter YValue on wicked Mammon, than
Integrity. Half a Crown, a Silver-Thimble, a
Brafs-Ring double gilt, a Pair of Jerfey-Stockings,
and the like, will parchafe you a Chamber-maid,
or one of her Rank at any time: Bribe but bigher,
and you may get an Arm full of Yrality, of what
Complexion or Age you please: For, after lolg
Observation, I find it to hold truer no Money, to
Alifirefs, than o Money, no Snifs. 'Tis a molt wick.
ed Cuflom, I confess, and ought to be banifh'd out
of all ci-iliz'd Nations, but the Disease, I am a-
fraid, has taken too deep rooting to be remov'd. To
coevince yod that this is trm, as likewise to give
you C"JfBIation all under one, I resolved to fend
you the following Story, which seems to be calcula
ted for the Meridian of your Cafe.

You remember, my dear Friend, or at leaf you
ought to remember that Silver-tolguz'd Orator of
Greece, who cou'd perform Miracles by his Elo.
qutence, I mean the celebrated DemoJfienes, who led
the Nobility and People of Althes just as he pleas'd,
and who was a greater Thorn in the ling of Mace.
dG·'s Soos, by the tingle Power of his Rbetorick,
than all the Captains of his Republick by their
BBraveiy. At the fame time, that this notable Ha-
ranguer flourif'd at Athenis, a certain Lady of Plea-
sure,. whose Name was Lais, flourifh'd at Corinth,
who was as famous for the LilIies and Roses in her
Cheeks, as our Atbeniir for the Tropes and Meta-
phors in his Speeches. No mortal Heart whatever
could withstand the irrefifiable Charms of Lais, and
no mortal Ears could defend themselves againfi the
bewitching Tpogue of Dem;Icihees. In ihort, they
agreed in this Particular, that both of them pro-
moted thepiblick Good with the Sweat of their Brovs,
though after a different Manner. History no
where informs us what Fees Demofjbeies used to de

mand

mand, but 'tis agreed on all Hands, that Lais
would be paid exorbitantly for her Attendance:
She was not one of those generous Damsels, that
think they are sufficient Gainers by exchanging Love
for Love; neither tho' lhefbrugbt for pay, did she
'lil her self to the next Comer for a fiall Matter:
No, all her Favours, were taxed, and at so high a
Rate too, that Ihe occafion'd the famous Proverb
you have heard so often mention'd, that every one
could not afford to go to Corinth. Dembfi, hnes, who
had been informed by common Report, of the
Beauty and attractive Graces of this charming Co-
rintbian, flatter'd himfelfthat this Proverb did not
asset him, and that 'twas impossible for Lais to
withstand the all-conquering Harmony of his Peri-
ods. Thus being fatisfy'd that he should gain
his Point, he took Pen in Hand, and sent a Cart-
load of Love-Letters to Lais: She, like a well-bred
Lady, civilly answered him, in order to lure him
on, being one that lov'd to bring these Matters
from Contemplation to PraSice. Upon this, our
Orator gets ready his Equipage, leaves Athens, and
sets out for Corinth. I cannot politively affirm at
this Distance of time, whether a dead or living Ve-
hicle carried him thither, that is to fay, whether
he went on Horseback or in a Coach, the old Philo-
gers being wholly silent as to this Point; but confi-
dering how deeply finitten he was, 'tis probable that
he rode Pjf if they had any such Convenience in his
Age. He was no sooner arrived there, but pluck-
ing of his Boots, immediately (for I still keep to
my Hypothesis, that he took Pofl) he repair'd to
the next Barber's Shop, where being molt nicely
powder'd and perfum'd by Tonfor, he put on his
best Linnen, brufh'd his Hat, and now imagining
himself as great a Beau as adonis, prepar'd to beat
up the Quarters of his new Miflrefs, whom he
fancy'd more beautiful than YVeiu. Coming in-

Aa 2 to

to her Apartment, he found her infinitely more
cbarmi;ig than he had imagined; he feated mmfelf
over against her, he ogled her, he exhausted all his
common Places, he fquander'd away the whole Stock
of his Eloquence, he said a hundred pretty Things
to her, he made her a Goddess, and what not.'
All this while L.is patiently heard our Athenian
Tongue-pad, still expeeting when he wou'd open
to the Puipofe, I mean when he wou'd present her
with a Purse of Gold. After the usual Forms were
over, he had .4fiurance enough to ask her the irs.
portant Question, and she had the Conscience to
ask ten thousand Drachms, that make up in our
Money - let me fee -- as I hope to be fav'd,
I can't tell you exafly ; but I dare venture to as-
firm, it was a very conjiderable Sum. This con-
founded Proposition put poor Demoflhenes so to the
Dumps, that, for a Quarter of an Hour, he flood
like one Thw;ider-firurc, without Sense or Motion:
At last recovering his Speech, Madan, cry'd he,
yorr bumble Servant: I am not in the Humour, at pre-
sent, to buy Repentance at so dear a Rate, anodfo good
Night. The Grammnaians and Antiquaries have en-
ter'd into a furious Dispute about the Meaning of
this Word Repintance, and the most Learned are
agreed, that DemoJfbenes understood that which we
call the Nieapolitan DiieaJe, and, in his Time, went
under the Name of the Cointhbian Itch. Be it as it
will, qur Love-Jick Orator got home, alham'd and
confounded at the ill SCccefs of this Journey : And,
from that Time forward, he bellow'd very itre-
nuoufly against the Extortion of the Women ; but
did not make one tingle Convert in the whole Sex.
And' now, Sir, I hope I have somewhat qualify'd
your Uneaiinefs, by laying before you this Ad-
venture of Demoflbenes. This fcjadalots Traffick
of fia';g Favours, is no rodernt Invention of the
Ladies, but as old as the Creation. As for those

7iOjO

noisy Coxcombs, that pretend to carry the whole
Feml'alWorld before them, by their Rbetorick, and'
have the Impudence to lay Wagers, that thly'll
bring the greateit Coquete to their Terms in three
Days, only larugh at them for Fops, for they are
'not worth your answering. Let them pretend
what they please, I'll engage that ten Pifols will
go farther, than ten thousand of the finest Stan-
za's and Letters in the World ; for Me;eit is a Sort
of an antiquated Coin, which not one Woman, in
a Million, will take for ready Money. I am,

Ac.
To Monsieur de B
In the Beginning of this Letter, he rallies his

Friend for not writing to him ; and after-
wvards gives him an Acconmtof a merry In-
trigue he had with a Hugonot Pafon's
Wife.

PON myWord, Sir, I am exceedingly ob-
iged to you, for the extraordinary Opinion
you seem to have of my Frieidf,)ip, since you be-
lieve it can thrive and prosper like the Fruits of
Paradise, without cultivating or looking after. To
be plain with you, can you expec2 I should enter-
tain you, from Time to Time, with my Letters,
while you refjufe to put your self to the Expcnce
of one single Line ? But you are the pleafanteJl Gen-
tleman in Nature, I swear, when you tell me, I
have Wit enough to gueJs at all you can fay in an
Answer, and therefore forbear to write to me.
What ! are you so unireafoinble to expecd £I hould

Aa 3 uo

do like Friar MAartin, that is, sing and make the
Rejfponfes my self?. Had you the leaf Regard to
my Reputation you wou'd never serve me so, for
none but Fools use to talk to themselves ; and, for
my Part, I begin to be wea;y of it. Beiides to
disarm you of all Excuses, your iifJreJs can never
be fojealous of you, but you may venture a few
Lines to a File-ld, without incurring her Difplea.
fire. With all due Submi/on to the Lady, be it
said, Friendlip does not i7nterfere with the Interest
of Love, so tliat I may very well be allow'd to
find a Frield, at the fame Time that the charming
Urania finds a Lover in you. Having made men-
tion of Love, I have trump'd up a new Mistress
lately; but thou art so lnpardonable a Wretch,
that I hardly think it vortb my while to commnult-i
cate this Affair to thee. In short, I am fb cot-
c er'd at thy Negligence, that, by my good Will,
I cou'd deny thee this finall Satisfaction but
Frlid1hip combats furiously within me, and I
perceive will get the better of my Refentmnet.
Know then, thou%,'ic.id Reprobate, that, for this
last Month, I have paid mry Devotion to a Calzi-
sifi Parson's Wife, wrho is wonderful pretty'and
go.d-ntui' d ; which lafI Quality, you know, is
seldom to be found in the Females of that fover
Perfivalion. I daily make my Visits to her, and
ihe firijs them, fuffrs theim, I fay, without Re-
7luiaice, and perhaps not without Pleafire. When
I firfi made her a Tender of my Affeaion, the
pretty Creature peltedme.moft unmercifully with
Texts of Scripture: But I soon turn'd her AJtillny
upon her fell; and convinc'd her, that all the Or-
thodox Commentators were on my iide. Perhaps
you laugh at this Galantry, tho', at the fame Time,
you approve my pilos Resolution, to caress none
but Ih!gi:,ots: For let the censorious World make
the rorfi on't it can, People can only charge me

w'ith

with tempting a Womali tofin, that was tbove half
damn'd to my Hands. But let them talk as they
please, 'tis a Design I am refolv'd to put in Execu-
tion this Lent, for the Repose of my Conscience.
I intend, for the future, to bunt no where but in
the Territories of Geneva, where I llall be with-
out the Jurifdi.7ion of the Church, so that my
Confessor will have nothing to do with any Game
I spring there; and indeed, if he pretends to br-
bid me this Sport, I ihall appeal from him to foine
more competent Judge. By this Time I hope you
are fatisfy'd, that I have taken the firefl Method
offucceeding, and that a young Fellow cannot
better employ his Time, than in making Lozv to
Women, that never go to Confejion. That coi-
founded Church Stratagem, call'd Confreion, is a
mortal Enemy to all Galllantry, by the fame Token
a Man shall have an ApoJtle's Day, now and then,
pop in unluckily upon him, when he has almost
brought an Intrigue to bsar, and so make him loef
in one Mlinute all the Ground he has been'fjiruglilg
for so many W'eeks before. But, the Lord be prai-
fed, there are no such Misfortunes to be sear'd. a-
mong the Hutgonots .The good People of that Per-
finwaion never trouble their Heads with keeping a
Catalogue of their Sins, but let them lye at Sixes
and Sevens whereas we discreeter Catholicks pay
off our Scores once a Montb at least, and then be-
gin a frefl Tick. The belt JeAf of all is, our
HuiJand, according to the common Fate of molt
Clickolds, is the kindeRt, civilleft Fellow in the
World to me, and imagines the only Motive of my
coming so often to fee him; is to be fettled in some
Points of Religion. To countenance this Belief in
him, I seem to be wonderfully furpriz'd at his
Discourse, nay, sometimes allow him the better
of the Argument.; and, indeed, 'tis merry enough
to confider how barimonioijly the Buiinefs of Sin

A a 4 and

and Religion goes forwards in his House; for
while old Oi tbodox thinks to make a Convert of me,
I'm endeavouring, by way of Retaliation, to make
a WPore of his Wife.

To Monsieur de S
)Ou Author endeavours to comfort his Friend

for having loft his MiJfrejs.
Commend you for making me the Confident
both of your Love and Afftliion ; for tho' you
had not been cblig'd, in Point of Friezndl)ip, to have
done it, yet the Conformity of our Misfortunes
seems to have cbga;l'ngd it from you. I am con-
cmn d at your ill Luck, and resent it with as lively
a Concern, as if it were my own. Were you to be
comforted after the usual Manner of People in Di-
firess, that is, by citing to you the Examples of
other Persons as 7ifortiuate as your self, I cou'd
easily produce my self, as an Instance of human
Infelicity, who have all my Life-time been perse-
cuted by- Lov, as well as a constant ill Fortune.
If the perfidious Melissa has defpis'd you, my cruel
Califia has beRfow'd the fame Treatment upon me.
At the fame Time, I muff confess, that Califia is
not altogether so unjust as Melissa, since she be-
holds none of those Jhining Qualities in me, which
the other fees in you ; for which Reason I ought
only to condole your Hardship, without thinking
of my self, who am too worthless a Wretch to be
comforted. But lince you have commanded me
to administer to you some Consolation out of my
own Store, I cannot begin better, than by remind-
ing you of the ancient Proverb, which fays, that

;Fortuoe

Fortune and Love don't always favour the most
deserving. One wou'd think that a handftn young
Fellow, like your self, was only made to be belo-
ved, and that the Ladies ought to prefer such as
comr.e neare to them in Point of Beauty, to those
are farthest remote from it: However, we find the
quite contrary usually happens: Women are the
moltfantaffic Animals in Nature as to their Affe-
dions; they love without knowing why, or where-
fore, and blindly follow the DireCtion of their Pas-
ons, that never advise with Reason. What finer
Gentleman did Italy ever produce, than Joculdus,
witty, generous, gay, and beautiful; yet does
not History inform us, that the dear tife of his
Bosom lov'd the Embraces of her CoacbmJn much
better than his, a RaJkal that was as ugly as the
Devil, and Jfunk worse in. his own iingle Person,
than a Convention of Pole-Cats ? Who has not
heard of Afolphus, the famous King of the Lon-
bards, whose Beauty made him admir'd by all the
World ; yet his vertuots Queen left him, tofolace
her felf-in the Arms of a little diminutive crum-
pled Brute, whose very Sight was enough to put
Maffalina her self out of Conceit with the whole
Sex? And now, Sir, do you think it flrange that
flhe has abandon'd you for that walking Tun of
Guts and Garbidge, your Rival ? Tell me not,
that your Misfortune is without Example: Were
I not afraid to overwhelm you with Variety of
Citations, I cou'd eaiily refrejl your Memory with
the ancient, but true Story of the celebrated Pene-
lope, whose Vertue and Chastity have been recom-
mended to all succeeding Women, as Patterns to
follow. Don't you know, that during the Ab-
fence of.Ulyjfes, she was courted by abundance of
young Lords and Noblemen, who omitted nothing
that cou'd contribute to gain her Affettion : There
wras nothing but Mulick and FeafRing, and Mag-

nificence

nificence; yet the Devil of any Progress did these
young Lords and Noblemen make in Pentelops
Heart, with all their Mufick, Feasting, and Mag-
nificence. At last, a Crotchet took Mercury in
the Pate, to undertake that which all these fine
Princes had attempted in vain. He flatter'd him-
self, that being a God, he Ihould easily surmount
those Difficulties which frail MIortals had found
invincible; and that Penelope must be a Statue, or
something worse, if fie cou'd maintain her Heart
against his fine Shape, his Eloquetce and Address,
But notwithstanding all this, Aercuiy succeeded
not a jot better than the reft of his Rivals. Find-
ing that neither his fine Shape, or his Eloquenc
made any Impreflion upon the Lady, he had Re.
course to Address, having had the Honour, more
than once, to serve his Father Jpiter in the pain-
ful and laborious Character of a Pimp. But he
difplay'd all his Dexterity to no Purpose there-
fore, to bring Matters Jooner to an Iifue, he me-
tamorphos'd himfelfinto a Goat, and, under that
agreeable Form, caress'd this irreconcileable Enemy
to Love, the chaf and virtuous Penelope. Now,
what will you be able to reply to me, dear Friend
of mine, when I shall desire you to remember, that
a paltry, stinking C-eature, iwith Hoofs and Iorns,
obtain'd those Favours, which so jnany whining
Coxcombs, and even Mercnry himself had follici-
ted in vain ? Pentelope, who had flood burffto all the
Charms and Courtship of Gods and Men,, furren-
ders up her Person to a vile, nasty Adimal; and
what was the Effect of this nml3turel Commerce,
but a cloven-footed Puppy, I mean Pa7, the il-
luftrious Prince of Fauns and Satyrs ? Let me de-
fire you, Sir, to chew the Cud a little upon this
iwnftruniv- Story; and when you have done so, tell
me, whether you and I have not ihown our selves
v BrEce of idle Coxcombs, to La;guifi and die for

two

two insignificant ungrateful Coquets. Were we
,;ie, we should leave offthis Game, and start a
better. As for you, 'tis in your Power to chufe a
hundred Mistresses, that will think themselves ho-
7oiur'd with the Leavings of the insensible isMela,
and will be much more capable to comfort you
upon the Score of your Lots, than I can pretend
to. Deliver your self therefore from a S!ave;y,
which will be dishonourable to you, since your
. Mistress has made so vfle a Choice. Conitancy is
often a Vice as well as a Virtue, and all the World
will laugh at you, to show it upon this Occasion.
For my Part, I advise you nothing but what I
am refolv'd to put in Pralice my self: Whenever
the cruel Califc, who has not as yet thought fit
to declare her self, fball bestow her Affecion upon
any other than my self, that very Moment I will
throw off her Cbains, and not drag them about
me to set off the Triumph of my Rival. I will
fee him crncify'd a hundred Times over, before he
shall have the SatisfaHion to fee me drop one fin-
gle Tear for those Favours which he enjoys at
Pleasure. No, I will drown all my Cares in a
Glass of generous Red, put the ill-ntatir'd Jilt-in
the Front of some glorious Lampoon, break her
Windows, murder her Lap-dog, and wish her and,
her Spark at the Devil. This is the Remedy.I wou'd
prescribe to you in your present Distemper, and
not to let it grow upon you, by humouring it;
which wou'd make me as great a Slfferer as your
self, since I feel all your Afflitions in as JeiijJible a
Manner as I do my own. Forget a wvortbiefs Crea-
ture, that has forgotten you ; nay, remember
that Mleli0a has obliged you by resigning you up for
another, since 'twas impolible for you to have
pass'd one"eafy Moment, with a Woman of so
wretched a Tate. I am

To:r;, &c.

A

A Letter to Monsieur H -
Giving an Account how he frpriz'd a famozus

Mijf of the Tozwn, dining at her Lodgings
in an Undress, with two of her female Corn.
panions.

E LL, I have the moR comical Adventure
in the World to recount to thee, that's
certain. Ha, ha, ha, I shall kill my felt, I think,
with lntghbig at it, 'tis so riaiic:lus: Give me
leave to recover a little out of this Fit, and then,
dear Rogue, thou fialt bear all.

Know then - but this wicked Fit again in-
terrupts me - Well then, to be serious- -
Know that between the Hours of twelve and one
to Day, having gone through my whole Circle of
Morning-Vi/ts, I bolted untavares into the divine
Belienas Chamber, where I saw a Sight enough
to -- Pardon me, dear Tony, I am so tickled
wviththe Idea of it, that I mult take t'other Dose
of Laughter before I can tir a Step farther- to
have made the morofeft Cynick in the World forfeit
rI1 his G-raaity.

A Plague on her, you know the divine Beliind
well enough, that ill-natur'd fawcy Harlot, that
comes every Night so spruced p and prim to the
Play-house; she that has been the Subje& of so ma-
ny Sonnets, and deify'd by so many confounded
Poets; she that is never without a.Train of Mar-
queffes, Lords, and Knights, and a 7tmberlelf
Litter of subaltern Puppies to buet her from the
Pit to the Side-box, and back again from the Side-
box to the Pit.- Well, and what of her, you'll cry;
VYhy, as I told you before, I bolted unawares into

hbe

'her Chamber, and furpriz'd her with two of the
Sisterhood at a finall Collation.

The Devil of a NapLin or Table-clotb was to be
seen before them. No Pagan Ragoo's, nor higb-
flown Kickihaws, but a Platter of humble Sprats,
attended by fix boil'd'Eggs in a crack'd earthen
Piokn, a Dab of salt Butter fiuck upon the Corner
of the Table, and a Handful of Salt wrapp'd up
in the greasy Fragments of a Sefons-Paper. Their
Commodes and Smocks were walking below by the
Landlady of the House ; judge then what a rufui
Figure they made in this DifJabillee, with their
Hair about their Shoulders, and their Udders swag-
ging down to their Navils. The Furniture of the
Room was every Way answerable to the Entertain-
rent ; for, let me fee - there flood that necefary
Utensil, call'd a Pifi-pot, brim-full in the Chim-
ney; a batter'd Banbox, upon a broken-back'd
Chair; the Skeleton of a Fan, with a Tootb-briuJ7,
a Powder-pzf, and a Box of Pomatum in theClofet;
a Row of Pins, with the Acadeny of Comple-
ments, and one of Durfy's Song-Books in the
Window, and laitly, two or three little Deal-
boxes upon the Mantle-tree, which I hope in the
Lord had 'trpentine Pills in them. The Ladies
blihl'd, and so did I; then down Stairs theyflew
without speaking a Word, and I after them, but
loft them in some of their subterranean Cata-
combs. .

No sooner was I got into the Street, but I made
abundance of moral Refleftions upon what I had
seen: These impjudent Devils,' said I to my self,
that look so charming by Candle-light, bless me
what Jorry Dowdies they are in their Undress,
and how fcnrvily do they fare at Home, who are
so 7ice, Forsooth, aid so squeamish at the Tavern-
Weil I am refolv'd to sudeceive all Mankind, and
coa,1municate my Difeoveries to them. With this

vsrttous

ertuous Resolution I went to all the Chocolate.
Houses I knew, to fil out any of my Acquain.
tance, and uiobofo my felfto them; but meeting
not a single Soul there, I repair'd to my Lodgings
and cou'd not reJf till I had imparted this blejfd
News to thee. I can't foretell how this Letter
will edify with you; tho' if you make a right
Use on't, it may prove a better Antidote against
Whoring, than a Month's Pennance in Love's
Powd'ring-tub - . But as for the divine Be.
linda, the next Time I fee her LadyJlip in the Side.
box, if she's not as civil and humble as one of her
own Calling before a iuly Justice, take my Word
for't, I'll proclaim the Nakedness of her Land to
all her adorers.

Farevel.
To Monsieur de C- Captain in the Regi-

ment of.-
TUpon the Conclusion of the War between France

and Spain, in sheTear I66o. by tbeTreaty
of the Pyrenees.
T HIS comes to tell you, tho' I know youll
T cufe me for my News, it you must now
resolve to live, whether you will or no. In short,
the Peace was Yesterday concluded, and, in a few
Days, will be proclaim'd all over the Kingdom.
Ill allow a Gentleman of your Gallantry to be an-
gry at it; but 'tis no little Corfolation to us wortbh
kle Fellows, that we are going to enjoy the Fruits
of Peace and Traniquilitv, which the confoultded
Noise of Drumns and Triump:its has so long inter.
rupted. With.the reft of his Majesty's good Sub-

jess,

jegs, I have my Part in the publick Joy ; yet at
the fame Time feel one that is particular to my
self, when I confider that I have nothing more
to far from your Bravery, and that your Life
is no longer a Woard to your Courage. The Devil
take the Guardian, fay I, that shows so small a
Concern for the Preservation of his ITard. Well,
I wou'd not for a greater Sum, than I am willing
to mention here, have ventur'd my Life upon the
fame Bottom with yours, in any of the late Engage-
merits. A Man that had seen how you expos'd
your self upon every Occasion, wou'd havej worr
your Life was a Burden to you, and that it cos
your Father and Mother no Pains to beget you.
Had the Mlijket-balls been nothing but so many
Panfi.ls or perfinl'd Iags, you cou'd not have march'd
with more Alacrity into the Trenches. 'Twas to
no Piwpofe I remonfirated to you, that your Life
was worth the preserving, that there was no great
Letcberv in having ones Brains examin'd by a Can-
non-ball i and that your Father, as able and ex-
perienc'd a WtYrklian as he is, might belabour the
matrimonial Anvil a dozen and a dozen Times to
that, before he cou'd hammer out such another
chopiizg Youth as your self; for in short, all Ad-
vice of this Nature was thrown away upon you.
Misled by that Ignis fatuus, call'd Gallantry, you
believ'd me to be an Enemy to your Glory, and
thought a Son of Jars ought to despise the Cout-
fel that caine from so cowardly a Principle as Dif-
cretion. I own indeed you took the direS Road to
get a Marefchal's Baton ; but alas, where one Man
arrives to his Journey's End, how many thousand
drop Jlort by the Way! In my Opinion now, a
Mhan that sets Honour always before his Eyes,
ought now arid then to look behind him, and re-
fleE upon the Dangers that attend it. You, Gen-
tlemen in Red, think a Man is only born to be

knosi'd

iock'd in the Head; but we, of a'more peaceable
Cloth, are wll enough content to be disappointed
of those Honours. Now, as I humbly take it, this
fantaftick Idol of yours, this Spoiler of fine Shapes,
this Lover of Blood-ihed, Valour I mean, is the
greatet Curse that a Man can bring with him into
the World ; for which Reason I thank my Maker
duly every Morning, for not bestowing this fatal
Talet upon me. To deal plainly with you, I
was never any great Admirer, either of Alexander's
or Csjar's Glory, which was purchas'd by the De-
folation of so many ftourijing Provinces, and the
Sla.ghter of so many innocent Wretches. These,
and the like Calamities, have too long over-run all
France; but now their Reign is over, the Lord be
praised, and we shall fee 7o more of them ; for I
mufl once more tell you, tho' I displease you ne-
ver so much, that the Peace is concluded, and that
I have no other War now to apprehend for you,
but that which your Mistress is refolv'd to declare
againit you at your Return.

Yesterday I, and four of my Friends, enter'd
Fo07tarabia, where the late Prince of Conde cou'd
not get Entrance at the .Head of Ten thousand
Men. Mijfake me not, Sir, as if I told you this,
with an Intention to magnify my Bravey : No,
'tis one of the blessed Effects of the Peace: And to
convziceyou, that 'tis so with us, I must inform
you, that we live in the ftrideft Amity imagina-
ble with those worthy Gentlemen, the Spaniards,
who are not such ill-favoulr'd Devils, as we us'd
to paint them, but treat us with Rofa-folis, 7l'ime,
and Chocolate, as lovingly as if we had tumbled
in the fame Belly with them, and not a Soldier of
their Nation beei ! ld-1. in an , o :he late Actions.
They are a civil. wv ' :-b9Sd Peophlp, as i hope to
befir'd ; and rh I',e e take me, i' I don't love
them heartily, b t
aufe they carry no Gal or Rst-

C0ii

eCyr about them: Not but that you may hear
them complain now and then, one of having loft a
Son, another-a Brother, and a third a Relation, ei-
ther in Slanders, Catalonia, or Italy. But this-is
nothing, the complaining Fit is loon over with
them and, to repair the Lofles they have fuftain'd,
,ou'd be content with all their Hearts, that a sus-
icient Number of our abloft Troops were sent into
Spain to beget as many Children upon their Wo-
men, as they loft Soldiers in the War. All our
Politicians here are of Opinion, that this is one
of the principal Articles of the Treaty ; and that,
for this Purpose, abundance of the ablest MatJbe
maticians in Europe will be employ'd to compute
how many Men the Spaniards have loft, to a jingle
Centinel, since the falli7rg out of the two Nations.
As for me, I think it the most reasonable Proposal
inthe World; and lince I have not had the Honour
to be employ'd by his Majesty in his tars, am
very willing to serve him upon this Occafioit, for
which Reason I will use all my Iiterefl.at Court
to procure me a Company in one of these RegiP
ments.

Well, certainly this is the merriest Country in
the Universe.. The Children-here can dance before
they can speak, and cry for a Guitarre more im-
patiently, than they do for the sicking Bottle.
Their Mirth begins with their, Life, and never
concludes but with it: Nay, their very Prieffs
have their Share of it, as well as the ress of their
Flock;' and I have obferv'd, that at all their
Weddings and Merry-makings, the Parron is the
Man who constantly leads up the Dance. But of
all their commendable Customs, that which I mlof
love them for, and all the World, in my Opinion,
ought to imitate, is, that there is a Probationflhip
here in chufing a 7Fife, as well as in taking the
MAonafick State upon one. After they have con-

B b film7nated

Jifnmated for a Twelve-month together, if Joan
does not like ohbn's Abilities, or Joht is fcanda.
liz'd at' Joan's Capacity, they are at Liberty to
part; and a young Wench that has had half a
dozen such Hrzjbands one after another, carries her
Head as bigb as the modejfefl She in the Parish, and
no Body dares fay black is: her Eye. Well ! how
happy a Place would France be, were this righte.
ozas Fafhi!n obfeIv'din all its Provinces.

Before I coizclute this Letter, give me leave to
acquaint you with an odd Accident that has hap.
pen'd upon these Coafls, and which perhaps may
not be improper to recount to you. Not many
Days ago a poor Whale, having heard without
Question, that the Peace was concluded between
the two Crowns, and poffeif'd with a laudable
Curiojty, to fee two Nations united, which had so
miserably irfeftd one another in the late War,
imagin'd he might come into these Seas without
any Detrm;imnt or Moleflation to his Princely Per.
son; for which Reason he left his native -Shores of
.horwgy or Grec7,la7d, to aflif, at so illustrious a
Reconciliatioi, and carry the bappy News through-
out all Neptztme's Dominions: But the Iortby Tars
of this Place, who understand neither Rhine, nor
Reason, having no Regard to the Articles of Peace,
nor yet to the Rules of Hospitality, that are every
where sacred, no sooner saw this high and mighty
Potentate appear upon their Coafis, but like a Par-
cel of Raskals, without any formal Declaration of
War, or the least Ajfrolt from his Northern High-
ness, they attack'd him with all the Pose of the
River, not confidering, that two to one is every
where oddS, as well by Water as Land, mani'd out
a hundred Boats againf him, and brought him in
a trilupbaxit Manner into the Harbour. You
know how corrupt the Courts of Admiralty are over
all Gbrifen:dom,-and what little Refpec is paid to

the

the Law of Nations, where the lonlgef Sword puts
in its Pretensions. In Ihort, they declar'd him
good Prize, an; made a Prefint of ,him to Cardi-
nal Mazarine, who either out of good Htfirbanary,
because he knew it wou'd require so many Tuns
of Butter to fry him in, or for some other Reason
bes known to himself, wou'd not keep him, but
sent him to Don Louis de Haro' who, out of Rle
velge, fends his Excellence every Week two Mules
laden with Ice.- But I have trefpafs'd too much
upon your Patience. Send me Word in your next,
when we may expeS you in there Parts; and be
affur'd, that none of your Friends withes your
coming with more Impatience, than
St. John de luz. Tour mo/ hbumble, &c,
APanegyrick upon Cardinal de Richelieu in

a Letter of Monsieur de Voiture,

The Argument.
llMonfieur Perrault, in his Paralelle des Modern,

opposes this Letter to Pliny's famous Pane-
gyrick upon Trajan. I must confess 'tis ve-
ry handfomly 'written 5 but I believe that
none but so great a Bigot for his Country as
Perrault, would have ventur'd to make the
Comparison.
Am not one of those, as you would seem to
in/inate, that love to improve all my Lord
Cardinal's A6tions into Miracles, and carry his
Praises beyond their due Bounads and while they

Bb 2 would

would make the World believe well of him, facri.
fice all Regard to Credibility. On the other Hand,
I am not of that base detracting Temper, as to
bate a-Man meerly because he is above the reft of
the World; neither will I susser my self to be
ca-ried away by popular Prepoffeflions, which, I
know, generally speaking, to be unjust. I confi.
der him with an unprejudiced Judgment, where
Paflion has nothing to do on one Side or the other;
and I behold him with the fame Eyes,' with which
Posterity will behold him. And certainly two
hundred Years hence, when those who look upon
him after us, hfall read in our History, that the
great Cardinal de Richelieu demolifh'd Rochel, con-
founded the Hereticks, and by one fngle Blow, took
thirty or forty of their Cities all at once; when
they fiall come to find, that in the Time of his
fiLnif;y, the Englifl were beaten and repuls'd,
Pigier-ol coiquer'd, Cafal reliev'd, Lorrain join'd
to our Crown, the greatefi Part of Alsatia reduc'd
under our Subjection, the Spaniards defeated at
ellaine and Ave.in; I fay, when they fhallfind
that while he prejided over our Affairs, France had
not one Neighbour, over whom she did not gain
fbme important Vicory or Town: If they have
the least Drop of Frencl Blood in their Veins, and
any Love for the Honour of their Country, can
they read-thefe Things without having a great

ife2ionl for him ? Do yo think they will love or
eftsem him the less, because in his Time the Pay-
wnents of the. Town-Hall came in somewhat of the
slowest ? or because fomre new Offces were ereced?
Great Things cannot be done without a great Ex-
pece . and to cramp 'em. for want of Money is to
maim their Ex:cution. But if we are to look upon
a KIingomn as immortal, and to confider the a-
vwet. g.s.it .will reap in fatutre Ages, as. if they
were 7a all7y prefeft , let us compute how many

3Millions

Alillions this Man, whom they pretend to have
ruin'd France, has fav'd her, by the bare taking
of Rocbdl which Town,two thousand Years hence,'
in all the 3Minorities of our Kings, upon every Dif-
content of:the Nobility, and upon all Occasions of
revolting, would molt certainly have rebelld, and
oblig'd us. to a perpetual Expentce. Our Kingdom
had only two Enemies to fear, the Hugownts, and
the Spaniards. My Lord Cardinal no foQner enter'd
upon Affairs, but he immediately refolv'd to ruin
both. Was it possible for himI to form more gloi
rious or more advantagiols Deligns ? He has happily
effected the one, but has not compleated the other.
However, if he has fail'd in his firftDelign, those
that now cry out, that it was a rash unreasonable
Resolution, to pretend to attack and humble the
Power of Spain;- and that Experience had fifficient-
ly Shown it; yet would they not have been as
forward to condemn his j)eiign of ruining the Hu-
goltts? Would they not have told us, that he ought
not to have embar1i'd in an Enter-
prize, wherein * three of our King h Francs
, I.
had fucceflively mifcarry'd ; and nry III.
which the t late King did not so t Hen. IV;
much as think of? And would they
not have concluded as faljly as they do in this
other Affair, that the Thing was notteafable,
meerly because it was not already done ? But let
us confider, I beseech you, whether 'twas his or
Fortune's Fault, that he has not as yet accompliJb'd
this Design: Let us fee what M'ethod he took to
efect it, and what Engines he set on work: Let us
examine whether he has fail'd much offeling that
mighty Tree- the House of Alrrria i and has not
Shaken the very Root of that Trunk, whose two
Branches cover'd the North and the tefi, and o-
verfhadow'd the ref of the Earth. He went
as far as the Northern Pole, to find out that

Bb 3 ' Hero,

2'I:

· Hero, who feem'd predeflinted to
KGi isas "A lay the AV to it, and bring it to the
dolphus. Ground. It was his Address, joyn'd

with this Thunder, which fill'd all
Germnay with Fire and Desolation, whose Noise
was heard by all the TYorld; but when'this TempeJf
was difpers'd, and Fortune had turi'd away the
impending Blow, did he flop ihort in his Course,
or cease his Designs for this ? And did not he bring
the Empire lower, than it had been by the Losses
of the Battel of LipJick, and that of Lutzen His
Dexterity and good ConGdi/ rais'd us all on a fud-
den, an Army of forty thousand Men in the
Heart of Gnerany, with a General at the Head of
'em, who was Master of all the great Qualities
that are necefflary to bring about a Revolution in
any State. If the King of Swreden threw himself
farther into Danger, than became a Person of his
Defignr and Rank; and if the Duke of Fridtaint,
by over-delaying his Emterprize, fuffer'd it to taka
Air, and be difcover'd; was it possible for the
Cridilial, either tocharm the Bullet, which kill'd
the former in the midst of his Vi¥tory, or render
the latter impenet-ablb to the Blows of a Partian ?
And if after this difinal Blow, to compleat the
Ruin of our Ajfairs, the Generals, who commanded
the Armies of our Allies before _'Oorligeft, gave
Battel at an unseasonable Time; was it poflible
for the Cardinal, who was above two thousand
Leagues from the Spot, to change this Resolution,
and frop the unadvised Ra.in;efs of those, who for
an Empire that would have been the certain Price
of a Victory, would not flay three Days longer?
Thus, you fee, it was impoflible to save the
House of A4:fiia, and hinder the Execution of
the CtirdiiZal's Deigns, which some People pretend
were so rai', had not Forture wrought three fir-
prizing Miracles that is to fay, three great E-

vslitS,

veits, which, in all Probability, would never hap-
pen; I mean, the Death of the King of Sweden,
that of the Duke of Fridlandt, and the Loss of the
Battel of Norlinges. You will tell me, he has no
Reason to complain of Fortune for croifing him
in this, since she had serv'd him so faithfully in
all his other DeJfgIs; since she put Places into his
Hands, without so much as laying Siege to 'em,
since, by her Favour, he commanded Armies fuc-
cefsfully, without the least Experietnc to direc
him; since fle condutRed him always, as it were
by the Hand, brought him safe out of the greatest
Precipices, upon which he had thrown himself,
and made him frequently appear bold, wife, and
forejeeing, without any Merit on his Side: Let us
therefore behold him in his evil Fortune, and exa-
mine if even then he fliew'd lets Boldn4fs, !Jifdo7n,
and'Forejfgit. Our Affairs were in no very good
Posture in Italy ; and, as it is the Diftiny of France
to gain Battels and lose their Armies, ours was
exceedingly dimignijbed ever since the last Vittory
we had gain'd over the Spaniards. We had not
much better Luck before Dole, where the Length
of the Siege made us apprehend its ill Success,
when we receiv'd Advice, that the Enemy had
enter'd Picardy; that they had, at the firit Onset,
taken Capelle, Caflelet, and Corbie; and that these
three Places, which ought to have stopp'd 'em 'o
many Months, scarce held 'em eight Days. All
was in Fire and Aihes, to the Banks of the River
Oise: We might behold from our Suburbs the
Smoak of the Villages, which the Enemy hadl
burnt. All the World was alarm'd at this sudden
Progress; and the Capital City of our Kingdom
was in the highest Consternation. In the midst of
there Calamities, Advice came from Bmurgildy,
that the Siege of Dole was rais'd; and from Xailn-
toigwe, that fifty thousand Peasants were up in

B b 4 Arms;

Arms; and that 'twas sear'd the InfeSion would
soon spread it self in Poitu and Guienne. Ill News
came pouring upon us from all Parts; the whole
Face of Heaven was overcafl: The Tenmpej inva-
ded us on every Side; and we had not the least
Profped of good Fortune to support us in these
Extremities: We could not fee Day through the
least Hole. But in all this Darkness, did the
Cardiaiil fee lets clear than at other Times ? Did
he lose either his Judgment or RefolZtion ? And,'da.
ring this Tempest, did he not always keep his
Rudder in one Hand, and his Compass in the other ?
Did he call out for the Long-boat to save himself ?
And, if the great Veifel which he fteer'd, was
deftin'd to be cast away, did he not ihow that he
was the si:s Man that refolv'd to perish ? Was it
Fortune that-deliver'd him out of this Labyriith,
or his own Prudence and Magnanimity ? OurEne-
mies were within fifteen Leagues of Paris, and
his were in the Town: He receiv'd daily Advice,
that Caba!s were held, and Defgns form'd to ruin
him: France and Spain were, if I may so express
my self, joyn'd in a Conspiracy against him alone.
Nso:w, amidst all these threatning Concurrences, in
so dreadful and black a Conju7iEtiot, how did this
SMan look, who, they pretended would be cast
down upon the least ill Success ? And who, as
they gave out, had fortisy'd Havre-de-Grace, on
purpose to make it a Place of Retreat in Cafe
of any Difriser ? He does not go one Step back-
sward for all this: He is taken up with the
Dangers of the State, and not his own: And
all the Alteration we could observe in him at
this Time, was, that whereas he never us'd to go
abroad without two hundred Guards before, he
now walk'd out every Day, only attended by five
Or j:i Gentlemen. All the World must own, that
an dverf;ity fppported by so good a Grace, and

..... waith

with so much Bravery, is much to be preferr'd e-
ven to Vidory and Prosperity it self. He did not
appear to me so great and victorious, even when
he made his Entry into Rochel, as then; and the
daily Visits he made to the Afleal, were, in my
Opinion, more glorious to him, than his famous
Expedition on the other Side the Mountains, when
he took Pignerol and Susa: Therefore let me con-
jure you to open your Eyes, and, to prepare you
for beholding so bright an Objet, lay aside your
Averjfon to the Man, who is so happy in revenging
himself on his Enemies; and cease to wish ill to
him, who knows how to turn it to his Glory, by
behaving himself so undauntedly under it. Leave
your Party, before they leave you, as a great Part
of his Enemies have done, that were converted by
the last Miracle they saw him perform, If the
IYar comes to be concluded, as there is Reason to
bope it will, he'll soon find a Way to gain the
reft over to his Side. Being so wife as he is, he
mufl certainly know, after so much Experience,
what is belt for us, and will turn all his Designs
to make us the molt flourishing People in the
World, after he has made us the molt formidable.
He will content himself with an Ambition, which
is to be preferred before all others, and is pra-
cdis'd but by few ; I mean to make himself the
best and most belov'd Man in the Kingdom, and
not the greatest and molt sear'd. He knows that
the most noble and molt lasting Conquets are those
of Hearts and AfeSions that Laurels are barren
Plats, that afford us nothing more thanSbade, and
are not to be compar'd with the Harvest and Fruits
with which Peace is crown'd. He c.,jders, that
it is nothing near-fo meritorious to enlarge the Li-
mits of a Kingdom a blindred Leagues, and bet-
ter, as to lefeen our Taxes Twelve-pence in the
Pound . and that there is less Grandeur and real

Glory

Glory in defeating an hundred thousand Men,
than leaving twenty Millions in their Ease and
Security.

Thus this mnghty Genius, which has hitherto
been solely emnploy'd in contriving and railing
Funds for the Support of the War, in railing Re
cruits, taking Cities,-and gaining Battels, will
for the future wholly busy himself in establishing
Peace, Wealtb, and Plenty. The fame Head which
was deliver'd of a Pallra in Armour, will shew us
the Goddess with her Olive-Tree, peaceable, gentle,
and learned, accompanied with all those Arts
which generaly march along with her. He will
pnblifh no more new EdiSs, but such as may serve
to refrain Luxiiy, and promote Trade. Those
great Vefels, that were built to carry our A1rms
beyond the Streigbts, hall, for the future, only
condlti our Merchant-men, and keep the Sea open:
-And we shall have no more War, but with the
lgernnes. Then the Enemies of my Lord Cardi.
ral ihall not be able to speak, as hitherto they
have not been able- to a a againt him: Then the
Citizens of Pm is hall be his Guards, and he will
be convinc'd how much more pleafivg and satis.
fa7Cory it is to hear his Praises in the Mouth of the
People, than in that of the Poets. But I beseech
you not to keep out till this happens; and flay
not to be his Friend, till you are forc'd to be so:
But if you are refolv'd to persist in your Opinion,
·i mall not pretend to use any Violence to make you
leave it. However, be not so fijis, as to take'it
ill. that. I hare defended my own, and I freely
promise you to read over whatever you think fit
to write to me, by way of Answer, when the
.Spa':ia,;ds have retaken Corbie. I am

To'ir mnof obedient Servant,

1 TU RE.

Din

A7
Diverting BILLETS to Ladies.
Out of Monsieur de * Pays.

By Mr. T. Brown.
A Billet from a Lady to the Author, whereh,
fie dejires him to carry her to fee the Lion
and Tyger.
TF what you hav swore to me a hundred Times,
1 be true, that is to fay, if you are so much my
humble Servant, as you pretend, so soon as you
have din'd, you'll come to our House, and carry
me and my Sifter to fee the Lion and the Tyger,
and some other odd Curiosities that are lately come
to Town. How great your Stock of Courage is, I
can't tell; but if you are not a rank Coward in-
deed, you'll be glad of the Opportunity to be
Master of the Ceremonies to us, and condud us in-
to the Presence of the aforesaid outlandish Gen-
tlemen. Thus I have given you a fair Occasion
of diverting me,. without putting you to any great
Expnce. Judge then, whether I am not the kin-
delt Woman upon Earth, since I am willing to be
oblig'd to you for so fnaU a Trifle.

Aitbtor of a fmo no Book, intituled, Amitiez, Amours,
& Amourettes.

The
---~~~~~~I

The Answer.
"T IS but reasonable, Madam, you ihould go
I and pay a Vilit to two such near Relations,
as those you mention'd in your Billet, and God
forbid that I should hinder you from diifcbargig
your Conscience in so necetary a Point. Yes
Madam, I will certainly wait on you after Din-
ner, and not lose the SJtisfadion of attending you
to an Interview, where, no doubt on't, there will
be a World of Caresses and tender Things on both
Sides. If Sympathy is the Mother of Friends/ip, I
am confident, that the Tyger and your Lady/hip will
be Hand and Glove, and strike up the firiEeft
,iance that ever was known. I fancy 'twill be
a most pleasant Sight to fee those two savage Crea-
tures humble themselves before you, lick your
Hands and Feet, give yon a gentle Squeeze by the
Arm, and tell you, in their Language, that since
you are a hundred Times more a Lioness and Ty-
ger than they, 'tis but reasonable they should own
you for their lawful and rightful Pueen: So that,
Madam, thd' both these Animals are let loose a-
tout the Room, I shall have nothing tofear from
them while you are there: Or if they have never
so much a Mind to make a Meal of my Carcass,
yet you may easily conjure them by the Friendjhiip
that is between you, or, to express my self more
properly, you may command them by the Au-
thority you have over them, not to deprive you
of the Glory of my Death: For in ihort, Madam,
it will be a most horrid Shame, if their Teeth and
PRs pretend to invade the Office of your Eyes.
Therefore be ailr'd my Cowardice will not hinder
me from feeing this Showr, Iince I shall have your
Company thither,

Billet

Billet from the fame.
She desires him to write her a few Lines, -in

Anfreer to a Copy of Veres fie bad received
from a Lover.
Here wifay all the angry Things I said to
you last Evening. You are good for something,
I must own, .nay, now and then, I cannot ba
without so 7ecefary a Gentleman as your self. If
I lose you for good and all, I flall lose the better
Part of my Diverlion ; and as cbearfil as I am in
my Temper, I believe sincerely in my Conscience,
that I should at least lanent you three Hours by
the Clock. I dare lay any Wager with you, that
you are not Conjurer enough to divine why I fwee-
ten and collogue with you so fitriozfly this Morn-
ing. Know therefore,that I want your Aflifance to
anfwver four of the finest, prettiest Stanza's I ever
saw, sent me this Morning by a worthy Gentleman,
who swears and vows he loves me better than his
Eyes. Let me die, if any Thing can be tenderer.
Therefore invoke me the Aid of that Familiar,
your Mnfe, and employ all Wit to answer them,
so that both the Gentleman and I may be fatE-
fy'd: Otherwise I revoke all the obliging Things I
beftow'd upon you in the Beginning of this E-
pijflc.

ng

30

The Anfier.
Ma am,
Y O U fancy, I perceive, that you have raid
I abundance of comnplaifant Things to me in
your Letter; but the Duce take me, if either I
do or will believe a Syllable of the Matter. Set
your Hand now to your Heart, and tell me in so.
ber Sadness, whether you madee a mighty Corn.
pliment in treating me like your Confident, when
you ought to have treated me like your Lover.
A wonderful Favour indeed, to desire me to write
a Copy ofVerfes, and all to please a Rival, whom
I wiih at the Devil. Well, for this once, Madam,
I am refolv'd to disobey your Orders: My Muse
is too young at present to set up for a Goer-between;
and, without Vanity, deserves a better Employ-
ment, than what you wou'd recommend to he:.
I keep her.in my Service only to assist me in my
.mours ; and ihould I ask hpr to do any thing
else, I am furel he wou'd deny me. Therefore,
Madam, you mut e'en anifwer your Gallant your
self; and the next Time you want a Cofident,
pray employ any one else, but

Tour, &c.
Billet from the fame.
She rallies him for playing the wbining Lover,

and fends him his Heart again.
Begin to be Dog-weary of hearing you corn
plain of your ill Df,,i7;y so often. Your Let
ters, as well/as your Conversation, run eternally

upon

upon this nauseous Strain, tho' I have told you
a hundred Times, that this is not the way to win
me. However you chufe rather to displease me,
than leave off this unfashionable Way of Court-
ship. If you are refolv'd to play the Milk-sop
fill, let me intreat you to lhow it elsewhere, and
not before me. In Ihort, if retoring the fignifi-
cawt Trifle, your Heart, to you, will secure me
from all farther Persecutions of this Nature, take
it again a God's Name, for I no longer pretend to
it, ince 'tis not fit for my Purpose.

The Answer.
Madam,
TOU show your good Nature with aWitnefs,
1 to fend me my Heart back, after you have
us'd it so scurvily above fix Weeks. Is this then
your Way of regliting those thatferve you ? Who
do you think will receive it in the blefed Condi-
tion you have brought it to ? No, Madam, e'en
eep it to your self, 'tis your own proper Cbattel,
and no Body but you has a Title to it. Once more
let me tell you, 'twas not handjomly done of you,
to fend it home iq so wretched a Pickle. Mangled
as it is, and burnt to Tinder, what Woman alive
will entertain it in her Service ? If you did not lika
it, you ought in Conscience, Madam, to have
sent it me back long ago. At the Time when. it
was whole and cheerfull, ( and such a one it was,
when I firit made you a Present of it) I could
have found MifirelTes enough that would have been
glad to receive it: But since you have so disfigur'd
it, that I my self hardly know it, you are bound
in Honour to look after it, and susser its Infrmi-
ties, since you have been the Occai'on of them.
Let it complain and bemoan it self never so much,

you

you ought to bear with its Lameitations. But if
they ofend you, and break your Repose, is it not
in your Power to make themn cease when you
please ? And have I not told you a thousand
Times which Way you may silence them Come,
Madam, put my Recipe in Pradtice, and I give
you free leave to fend my Heart back again, if
after you have try'd that Experiment upon it
you don't find it as full of soy and Gayety, as at
present 'tis of Grief and AffliSion.

To Caifla,
To acquaint her, that he's troubled with an

Ague.
Am up to the Ears in Love, Madam, as you
know but too well. I have a confounded
Quarrel upon my Hlads,. which I suppose is no
News to you neither. Thirdly and lastly, I have
a damn'd Law-Suit to manage, which you cannot
be ignorant of, iince I have told you of it so often.
To compleat my Misfortunes, I wanted nothing
but a Tertian Ag.ue, or some such Blessing to visit
me, which, Thanks to my ill DeJfiny, is come at
last to increase the Number of my other Perfecu.
-tors. Confidering with what Formality and Cir-
cumfpection it began to attack me, one may lay
a bundred Pounds to a Pew;y, that it will keep me
Company till next Spring. My Hand still trembles
with the Extremity of my last cold Fit, and my
Heart is almofi burnt up with the Violence of my
Palfion ; and what more propr Secretary can there
be, than afireezing Hand to a faming Heart ? As
-I am naturally of a gay, merry Temper; and, ac-

cording

cording to the common Opinion, an Ague al-
ways proceeds from Melancholy, I can't imagine
how it came to iingle me out of the Herd: For
hitherto, whether 'tis owing to my IfenJibility or
Courage, I have not been much difturb'd either a-
bout my Law-Suit, or my Quarrel. 'Tis a plain
Cafe then, that my Love has betray'd me to 'this
troublefoi Companion. For this Reason, to deal
plainly with you, I begin tofufpeE you, and fan-
cy that there is a secret Intelligence between you
and my Disease, and that the Flames you kindled
in my Heart, prepar'd the Way for those that
now scorch up my Body. And will the Queen of
my Heart then, to whose Laws it so chearfully
submits, lose the- Conquests fle has made ? Inte-
ref, one wou'd think, wou'd ditate better Ad-
vice to her, and perfwade her not to let a barba-
rots Enemy burn up, and destroy a Place that be-
longs to her Empire. Revenge your self then,
Madam ; and when your Hand is in,. revenge me,
and turn this impudent Aggressor out of your Do-
minions. I need not inform you, that this cursed
Aggreflor I complain of, is my Ague, that ill-
look'd, ill-natur'd, ill-contriv'd Devil, that loves
to make every one he pofeffes look as villainouflyi
as himself, that profefs'd Foe to Cherry-cheeks,
that DemoliftJer of jolly Constitutions, that Leveller
of Faces, and Deflroyer of all Mirth. Judge then
what will become of my poor Fortress in a few
Days, if this malicious Enginer batters it with his
great .Atillery from, and, at the fame Time; un-
dermines it from below. 'Tis true, he lyes idle
every other. Day; but, a Curse light on him, he
does me more Mischief in three Hours, than I am
able to repair in threescore. In ihort, I cxpea to
have this wicked Siege rais'd by none but you;
and this 'tis so easy for you to perform, that un-

Cc leit

less my Relief comes immediately, I shall con-
clude you don't think the Town worth saving.

I
To the fame.
He tells her after what Manner be will receive

her when Jhe comes to visit him.
TOU fend me Word, that you intend me a

1 fit this Afternoon; but does your Lady-
flip well confider what may be the EffeS on't?
Do you think 'tis possible to fee so doleful an Ob-
ject as- am, without paying some little Tribute to
Pity ? Or suppose your Heart is infenible to all
my Sufferings, do you know after what manner
I shall receive you, and whether you'll be pleasd
with your Entertainment ? Well, Madam, that
you may not be furpriz'd, I will acquaint you
befbre hand, what fort of a Reception you are to
expe from me.

In the sirs Place, Madam, when you come
into the Room, I shan't advance one Step to meet
you, that's positive but keep my Chair, like
the Great Mogul, or the Great Turk, which you
please; and the fame Ceremony I flall observe at
your going away. Then-when you have feated
your self, infead of complimenting you upon your
Beauty and- it, those two belov'd Topicks, which
you Women are so pleas'd to hear your Adlores
expatiate upon, I shall only entertain you with
the cruel Usage of my Distemper; and tho' you
look'd ten Times prettier than ever I knew you,
yet I shall fancy you as pale and yellow as my
self. Perhaps I shall not speak a Syllable to you
ih an Hour; or if I openmy Mouth, 'twill be on-

ly

Iy to ask your Ladyship, what's good for a Man
in my Condition, to complain of my i'ant of
Appetite, to tell how many Hat-fulls of Jefitits's
Powder I have taken to no Purpose, or relate to
you what odd 7rhimfies come into my Head, when
I am in the Heighth of my Pain. I fhall'think I
entertain you with very notable Discourse indeed,
when I acquaint 'you, that my Disease, by a
flirange unaccountable Magick, carries me, in the
Compass of twelve Hours, from the extreameJt
Parts of Lapland to Guinea that for the fix first
Hours I am so cold, that a cloy'd Lover's Appetite
cannot be more, and the'ix next that follow, I
am so hot, that all the Water in the Yolga wou'd
not cool me; that I am the Emblem of Mont.
Gibel, as they fay, that is of Hell, carrying two
conitrary Extreams about me ; that when I tremble,
I make all the Glafs-tI'indows for two Miles -about
meclatter and when I burn, one had better cross
the Lie,. than touch the least Part of me. Thus
you fee, Madam, what a diverting Scene you are
like to find in my Quarters. As for my Looks,
you never saw any thing so ghastly. and terrible:
My very Sight is enough to make a Sexton tremble,
that has made it his confant Trade td rifle the
Graves of the Dead; nay, fright an unbelieving
Priest into an Ague-fit of Devotion. My Phyfi-
cian, that was as rank an Atheist as Vanninzts
t'other Day, believes the Existence of Spirits alrea-
dy, by the fame Token, lie owes his Coniverion ta
me. You may count all the Teeth in my Head
thro' my Cheeks; and the Chirurgeons of the Town
bespoke me this Morning, to do them the Honour
to represent a Skeleton at their Theatre, and susser
one of their Fraternity to read an Anatomical Le-
dure upon me. So you mutl not be furpriz'd,
Madam, if I make you a fewfcnrvy Faces at your
coming in 5 'tis no imre than what I do to all the

Cc 2 World

World, nay, even to my dear beloved flf, when
! behold my Ph)z in the Looking-glafs. All the
Good you are like to find by me, is, that my Hatds,
of which you have so often complain d, are grown
the civiki, quietest Hands in the Universe, and
will not give you the least Occasion to complain of
them. Before George, in the Humour I am at pre-
sent, I hould hardly draw them from under my
Morning-gown, to play with Helen's delicious
Bubbies, which undoubtedly were very comrnje.
dable Bubbies, since, in Conjuntion with her
Face, they made the Greeks and Trojans deal their
handy Blows so liberally to one another. So now,
Madam, I leave you to guess, whether you have
any thing to apprehend from me, and whether
you will not part peaceably from me, without cal-
ling me saucy, rude Fellow, as you us'd to do.
This I mufl tell you too for your Comfort, that
I ihall be highly offended with you, if you pre.
fume to laIgh, according to your laudable Cu-
flomr therefore resolve to disguise the Gayety of
your Humour for a few Moments, or at least pre-
tend a little Compafion for me. Thus I have not
only inform'd you, what you mutt expel from
me, but how you are to regulate your Behaviour,
so that if you have any Desire, after all this
ghofily Counsel, to visit your dying Wretch, you
are fully inftruced how to manage your fel. As-
ter all, if you continue your Resolution, I would
advise you to come to Morrow, for 'tis one of my
Days of Reprive.

To

To Madam the Abbess of-
fie gives her an Account of his Indisposition

and how uneasily he pnffes his Nigbts.
T HE Clock. has struck Twelve, and 'tis now

just Jix Hours, seven Minutes, and a Garter
precisely, since I have been rowling and toiling in
my Bed, like a poor refjel in the Bay of Biscay.
All the Family is fast ajleep, and that young Raf-
kal my Footman fiores as heartily as a DnIrkard
after a Debauch. But all this while, that Epitome
of human Misery, your humble Servant, is awake,
and has nothing else to accompany him, but his
Pains and his Despair. 'Tis to no Purpose that I
make Vows to _Morpheits, promise him Sacrifice,
and invoke his Relief: The ill-matur'd God is ei-
ther too fast asleep to hear my Invocations, or too
tardy to answer them. Not knowing how to en-
tertain my self better, I built a thousand Cafiles
in * Spain ; but then again, when I
soberly confider'd that this was build- * A French
Ing Castles in a Prince's Country, Pro0erb eui-

valent to ours
that perhaps wont tthank me for my of ildiC
Pains, I immediately got up, quit- ftles in the
ted my Cbimara's and Caflles,to write Air.
you this Letter, and assure you, that
I value you more than all the Prines and Emperors
in the World. But under the Rose, Madam, what
Emperor deserves to be mention'd the fame Month
with you ? Auguflis, who was the ho7nejief of the
whole Pack, had only one Daughter, yet was not
able to keep her in good Order ; for several grave
Historians affirm, that she wou'd carry a Stone in
her Ear, whether her Father wou'd or no: But,
Madam, you have at leaftforty Daughters to

C2c , look

37

look after, yet you keep them all in due Deco-
rim; and as for your own Condut, Envy it fef
cannot find the least Flaw in it. Now tell me
fairly and squarely, whether ever you cou'd have
foreseen that you shou'd be compar'd and preferr'd
to Augufius, and of all the PanegyriJfs you have
known in your Time, whether any of them ever
made you so topping a Compliment; 'but, Madam,
these extravagant Thoughts and bigh Flights are
excufabl enough in a sick Man, whose Brains are
addled by the vilest ofDiftempers. This cursed Ague
has thrown me into a thousand other Follies, that
wou'd make you burfl your Sides with laighing,
ihou'd I undertake to fend you the compleat Hifto.
ry of them. What will you fay then, when I
a/fire you, that I am grown a wonderful Admiirer
of that venerable Piece of Antiquity, your Auilt ?
Cou'd you ever have imagin'd, that a lick Man
v.ou'd have long'd for so dainty a Morsel ? And
v'on't you now agree with me, that ain Agre gives
a Man a very flrange Appetite ? However what I
tell yon, is as trne that I am now writing to you.
I have had the Honour to receive only two Visits
from her but in that short Time have difcover'd
a thousand Charms in her, found her more witty
than your self, and more beautiful than CaliJa.
In Short, I have felt a certain Emotion, which I
hqould clrisen by the Name of Love, were I in
Health. You wou'd hardly believe. how many
;£a.e, tende;- Things I promise my self to fay to her,
and howr aofiduous I design to be about her ancitit
Person, so soon as I am recover'd. And yet, per-
haps, Thirfs when he is well, will not follow the
inclinations of Tbir;isthefick, but forgive C.liJf,
all the crael Railleries the has made both upon
his Crutches, and other Misfortunes. Since I
have m7nr1ticz'd her Name, I may venture to tell
jou, that you are bo',ld in Honour to possess that

i.lswna-s

ilnhutan Creature with a little of your own good
Nature. The Compagion you have been pleas'd to
eiprefs for me, gives me infinite Satisfadion: But
alas! What a refreshing Cordial wou'd it be to me,
if my and your Galifla ( for so I must call her,
since you beflow'd her upon me) wou'd thow me a
little of that obliging Pity, which you voluchfafe
me daily ? At the very Moment when I am wri-
ting this, I dare engage she sleeps as profozidly as if
fee had nothing to answer for; and that if she
dreams, her Imagination is making merry at my
Expence, either playing with my Crutches, or drol-
ling upon my Paleness. What is more, I dare.en-
gage that she'll be ready to die with larghiing,
when the knows I writ this Letter at Midnight,
and that too, when I had so little Temptation to
write. But let her make her self as merry with it,
as Ihe pleases, I am content, if you will but take
this Occa/ion to let her know how mneafily I pas,
my Nights. Above all, lay your Commands upon
her not to speak a Word of it, since it highly
conlce7rns you in Point of Reputation to have it kept
private. 'Tis a cenfrorios World, you know, and
who can tell what Jfrange Stories malicious People
may raie of us, when they come tSounderftand,
that a Man of my amorous Complexion got up at
Midnight, with no other Deiign, but to give him-
self the Pleasure of entertaining you ? Adieu ?

To Madam de H-
Occafion'd by fending down a Bed to her in the

Country.
Am not Prophet enough, Madam, to foretel
whether I have executed my- Commifi.an to

C c 4 your

your Satisfason, tho' no Care has been wantinhg on
my Side, I can aifure you: For I employ'd an
experienc'd WFoman of my Acquaintance, to direc
me in this Affair, knowing that we Batchelors are
not so proper Judges of all the good Zualities re.
quir'd in a Bed, as those that have learnt them by
long PraSice. All our Neighbours that have seen
it, like it exceedingly. One said, it was the
prettiest Altar in the World for a young Maidel.
head to be facrificd upon: Another, that it was
one of Love's little Cabarety, where a Brace of hun-
gry Lovers might refrej! themselves with a Bit
from the Spit, when they could not tarry till the
whole Joynt was ;ntrimoiially serv'd up to them.
Altho' I very well know, that it is not defign'd
for any such wicked Purposes, yet I cannot forbear
to enwy the Pleasures it will be cofciis to, and re.
flea what a delicious Scene of Happiness you and
I might act upon it, if you wou'd but give your
Comert, But there are Thoughts you are never
troubled with, all your Concern, at present, being
to know how much it cofi. If I took as much
Pleafuire to make others uneasy as you do, I should
leave you in Sufpence a Month or two longer, and
not clear it to you till I came down into the Coun-
try: But as I am not revengeful in my Temper,
be pleas'd to know, that for all it appears so mag-
wiifce,. and flately, I bought it with the iMoney
you gave me; and as for the Overplus, I fairly
laid it out upon a very fine Counterpane, for which
I pretend that you are very much oblig'd to me.
Confider then, Madam, that if I have been so
tnrjly a Manager of your Purse, how much a better
Manager I should be of a more precious Cabilet,
if you thought fit to trust me with it. Betides, I
must take the Freedom to tell you, that I am in
some fort a Benefaclor to your Repose ; and I may
vithout Vanity affirm, that, by my Means, a

certain

certain Person jleeps at her Ease, that diflutrbs the
Quiet of so many People. But I am afraid that
this Vnity, and a, small Conmpliment from you,
will be all the Reward I miall receive for the Pains
I have taken. Not but that if you were inclin'd
to do me Jrlflice, this Bed might easily enable you
to pay the Debt you owe both to my.Love, and
the Trouble 'I have undergone in this Affair.
Cou'd I have found ever a Conjiurer in this Part of
the World, before I had sent down the Bed to
you, I wou'd have brib'd him to imchant it in so
strange a Manner, that I might have revell'd in'-
your Arms, yet your Huiband have known no-
thing of the Business, and you not slept a Wink
in it, 'till I came to prescribe Love's Opiate to
you. How glad wou'd I have been to have pur-
chas'd so valuable a Charm as 'this, at any Rate!
And how wou'd I have hugg'd the honest Magi-
cian, that cou'd have help'd me to it! But no
such a Conjurer was I able to find, after all my
Enluiry, so that I was forc'd to fend you the Bed
in its true primitive State, without any other
Charms, than what all other Beds in the World
may as well pretend to, I mean the Faculty of ma-
king People sleep confortably, when Nature calls
upon them.' Take your Belly-full of it there,
Madam, you have my free leave for it; but
when that domeftick Animal, that lyes by your
Side, wakes you to perform Love's Mattins, in that
critical Moment, think ('tis the finallel Favour
you can grant me) oh ! tbink upon

The Laingiijing

THI R S IS.

To four Ladies, with borm the Author was

in Love at the fame Time.
Think I have given you a plain Proof, that I
am as much in Love with you, as 'tis poible
for a Man to be, face I can afford to write to you
at a Time, when I fifier as much as ever poor
Fellow fuffer'd. Upon mentioning my Pail, I
fancy you'll at firft.fufpe& it to be another fort of
aDiftemper than really it is: In the next Place,
I am afraid you'll think my Letter coitagioils, and'
for that Reason refuse to read it ; but, Ladies, as
I hope to be happy in the Embraces of you all
four, there's no Danger in't. My Distemper, in
short, is nothing but the Tooth-ach. and as for
that flight Indisposition, which you charg'd me
to have gotten in Spain, and I so often de&y'd, sup-
pose it were true, it wou'd have been so effltually
cur'd by this Time, that it ought not to hinder
you from keeping a Correspondence with me upon
that Score. Nu, Ladies, you need not fear any
.kfriwci, by reading my Letter. If 'twere polli.
ble for you to catch my Difeaje that Way, since
LIvs and the Too.t-acb generally go together, you
might, perhaps, catch Part of my Love; mind
me, Ladies, I Lay, Part of my Love; for shon'd
you catch it all, 'twou'd scorch you to Death ; for
! fwiear to you. I have the molt ardent Affe&ion for
you all four, vwhich I ever felt. And now, me-
think:s, I hear you cry out, that a divided Heart
is not worth a Farthing; and that a Man that
loves ,wre Women than one,loves izone at all. This,
perhaps, Imay be j.ffly enough said of your pFly
Gallants, that have not Heart-room enough to
lodge more than one Pbhils at a Time: But, La-
dies: my Hei-it is of a prodigious Capacity, and will

contain

contain you all four with.the greatest Ease in the
World, and that so cowzmodiouJly, that you need
not juitle or elbow one another. In thort, with-
out being guilty of Infidelity to any one of you,
I will love. you all four both in general and in
pmticnilar. Did you but'know what strange Emo-
tions and wambling of Bowels I feel within me, as
often as I think on the Tears, feigned or real, which
you were pleas'd to lped at my Departure, you'd
be-fatisfyd 'that I interpret them to my Advan-
tage. As often as I refle&t upon that melancholy
Farewell, so full of Tenderness and Concern, I am
Coxcomb enough to flatter my self, that I am feri-
oufly and heartily beloved by you all four: And
while I am poisess'd with this Contemplation, I
am ready to run mad, that I was so unhappy a
Dog as not to know this good Fortune of mine be-
fore I parted from you, that I might have my
Avantage of it while I was at --- But since I
have receiv'd no PleaJiire by it as yet, I am re-
folv'd to make my self some Amends, by boajling
of it; for you may swear I'll not be jilenit of the
Honour I had of feeing four Pair of the finest Eyes
in Chrifjendomn weep, when I took my leave of them.
In short, I relate this Hifiory to all I meet, Men,
Women, and Children, that will give, me the
hearing; in which Number you may safely in-
clude a World of pretty Ladies, who already begin
to lend me their Ear. If hereafter they shall
think fit to lend me any tbiug else, I will make
all you four my Ccilfidents, and fend you a pun-
ufal Account of it. At the fame Time, Ladies,
I muff intreat you to fend me the News of your
Parts, as likewise to love me a little, or, at least,
to make me believe you do. For a Proof of this, I
expet you should all four 1ifs the Bottom of this
Letter where my Name is written. Tho' I am so
many Miles distant from you, yet I fee, as plain

as

as my iand, Mrs. Mfry and Mrs. Betty going to
do it; but as for Mrs. Lttitia and Mrs. gonolr,
they scruple at the Bulnefs, and make wry Faces,
however, I know, they'll come to't at laif to ob.
lige a Friend - So, so, now al of you have
done it. But, Ladies, a trord before parting:
For God's Sake, not a Syllable of this to your
Husbands; or any one else; for we must expet a
terrible Noise indeed, shou'd it be known that
you kfis'd,

Ladies,
Tour mofl Humble and

Obedient Servant,
To the Fair
A Letter of Gallantry.
Ltho' my Love parted from you last Night
A1 in a great Pafion; yet as for my Self, Ma-
dam, I swear to you I went away very well satis.
fi'd. 'Tis a peevish, froward Child, that's cer-
rain, and has firange Humours with him. When
you have granted him one Favour, the young Son
of a Whore demands another, and another after
that, and so on, to the Ezd of the Chapter, that
is to fay, till you have granted him the a1l Fa.
vair ofall. But I preach'd all Night tothe squaw-
ing Puppy, that he had Reason enough to be fa-
tisfy'd, representing to him, how that languilh-
ing Softness he saw in your Eyes, those teaer
Words interrupted by so many Sighs, that fee.
ble Reflance attended with -so much Transport

and

and Emotion, were sufficient Proofs you were not
angry with him, but wou'd content his Longing
one of these Days. Then, to refresh the young
Rascal's Memory, I reminded him what an agree-
able Disorder you were in all the while, by the
fame Token you hardly knew what you did, or
what was done to you. Lastly, I gave him Rea-
sons to hope, that at our next favourable Meeting
he should have no Occasion to complain. In (hort,
to appease the Child, I pass'd my 7Ford for you,
so he quietly took a Nap, and still continues very
orderly. Therefore, Madam, I must conjure you
to be afifting to me, that I may keep my Promise
to him, for this little God, in Cafe he's difappoin-
ted, will lay about him like a Devil, and prove
a greater Thorn in your Side, than

Tour mos iomportunate Lover.
To Madam de B--
The Author excuses himself for not writing a

Love-Letter for her, as she defir'd him.
THE last Time I had the Honour of your Com-

pany, you were .pleas'd to enjoin me two
different Things. The former I now acquit my
fef of, in fending you the Gloves you defir'd me to
buy for you; but as for the Love-Letter you com-
mianded me to write, let me die, Madam, if 'tis
in my Power to obey you. Not but that I have
us'd all imaginable Endeavours to bring it about.
Upon my Word now I have harrafs'd and teiz'd
my poor Head beyond Exprefflon, and all to
dictate me a few fine Complimnents, in order to give

you

you this firall SatiVfaiion; but this Head of mine
is the most peroeif, fantastical Head in Nature;
and when I have mos need of his Afliftance, is
then sure to play me the fcrvieft 'Tricks. In
short, 'tis a giddy, hair-brain'd Rambler, and so
great an Enemy to all Counflraint whatever, that
when my Heart honestly advis'd him t'other
Morning to obey your Orders: I mnu, replies he,
be as implicit a Slve as thou art, to do every Thing
that is order'd me ; but Thanks to Heaven, and pid
owa good ConduE, I am free, and will obey no Body but
,yfelf. Hark you m7, Friend, cries my Heart to
him, you are a Blockhead for calling me Slave. I wil
tEnxtain it before all tbe 7Forld, that 'tie an Honolrmto
oey Califta, and little less than Rebellion to dispute
the meanzif of her Orders. What! an Honour to be a
Slav', fays my Head in a Fury ;'you may preach itp
tbe M erit of p'i0veC Obedisice as lo7g as you please, bit
'tis a Dosrine I fJ.zll niever Jfwallow ; for know I a
Rplublican: i7n my Nature, and declare againlZ all Ty.
r.n:iny whatever. And bow darefl tbou call Califta a
Tyrant, fays my Heart, fe whose Goodness is equal
to Jmr Beauty, and wbo, if Jhe delighted in making CoG*
quefs, might drag all Mankind after her triumpbant
Ch5.aiot. Iss Je tramples upon the Liberties of a free.
bont People, replies my Head, if /le fees her SAb-
jec7s fiiffer without endeavourinmg to Jave. them, if jie
kseps up a fandiig Army of little Cupids in her Eyes,
£oi'trary to Nature's Magna Charta, all which is mun
deiably true, why then I pofftively afnrm, that fie's a
Tyrant, and ought not to be obey'd in her arbitrary Ii-
junsions.

You'll be furpriz'd, Madam, without QuefRion,
to hear that I am plagu'd with such an initefiie
War within me; and, perhaps, havihg never heard
'till now, that the Hsad and Heart can be of two
differet Factions, you may question the Sincerity
of this Relation, But, Madam-, I once more aS

sure

fre you 'tis true ; and what will more. amaze you,
this Heart of mine became your Slave chiefly
through the wicked Injinlations and Counsels of
my Head, which was eternally telling it how
gentle and good condition'd a Mifrefs you werea
and by that Means engag'd it to part with its
Liberty. But after it had once pevaii'd with'my
poor Heart to surrender up its Freedom to you, like
a malicious lraytor as it is, it refits'd to follow its
Directions, pretending that it wou'd always con-
tinue free ; left you might believe it. ow'd you
any manner of Service, and to give you a Proof
of it, poiitively refus'd to write the Love-Letter
you demanded of me. Pardon me therefore, Ma-
dam, if I cannot obey you upon this. Occalion;
and be affur'd, that my Heart utterly disapproves
this Obstinacy of my Head, condemns its Rebel-
lion, and will dispute the Glory of being intirely
yours, with the proidefi Heart in the Universe.
And now, Madam,. may I be so bold as to ask:
you your Opinion of this Letter ? Is it not a oion
pareille in its Kind ? And is it possible to write
any Thing more extravagant ? I dare not pretend
to determine before-hand how you will reliff it;
but if 'tis so happy as to contribute the least to
yQxr Diversion, I ihall be infinitely pleas'd with
my Performance, since to satisfy you, is the grea.:
tef Satisfafion that can be to

Tour zoqf Faithful and

Obedient Servant,

To

To Madam de L
'A Billet written one Morning, when the Author

had taken Phyfick.
Know you are in Town, and am impatient to
fee you and yet, as my ill Stars will have it,
cannot satisfy this Impatience. What vexes me
most, is, that I am a/fam'd to acquaint you with
the Reason. All I dare tell you at present, is,
that 'tis an absolute incontrollable Reason, which
I am forc'd tofubnit to in spite of my Teeth; and
if I went about to contradi1C it, I hould soon find
my self in the wickedeft Disorder imaginable.
Thus I am conftrain'd to obey this haughty Ty-
rant, who, to be free with you, so imperiously fum.
mons me to dance Attendance after him, that he
las made me lay down my Pen half a score Times
at least, while I have been writing this short E.
piffle. But I hope his Reign will not last above
two Hours longer, that so soon as I have din'd I
may do my self the Honour to wait upon you,
and tell you in Perolon, with what Zeal I am,

Tour, &c.
To CaliJa.
Upon feeing her bathe her self in a River.
TTELL, Madam, all your Tricks and Ati.
WV sices are to no Purpose. Last Night my
good Fortune led me to the happy Place, where you
were bathing your self and tho' I saw a Sight in.

finitely

finitely finer than that of Diana all naked as she
was born, yet .4aon's cruel Destiny did not at-
tend me. But Madam, if.I might ask you a civil
Question, Why ihou'd you take so much Pains
to conceal your Beauties ? Upon my Word now, I
saw nothing like a Jfamefnl Part about you; or if
I did, 'twas only the Thighs, and fomethbig else
of your Siiter and Couiin, which ought to be
aJnianm'd to appear in your Presence.. The firit
Doorine I rais'd from my Text, was, that those
very Members you give your self so much trou-
ble to hide, are not a jot inferiour to what you
expose to common Sight, from whence I drew this
Inference, that there are a thousand pretty Women in
the World, that have more Reason to hide their
Faces, than you have to hide your - Had you
lived in that happy Time, when the good Folks
of Syraciitf dedicated a Temple to the fair-buttock d
Venus, your Ladyship had certainly been Goddess
of the Place, every one wou'd have brought his
Ofering to you, and saluted your plump Poferiours,
according to the Ceremony there obferv'd. Par-
don me, Madam, this Quotation is too just and
natural to deserve your Cenfare. As I never be-
held any Thing in all my Life so charming, as I
found you laftsEvening, I want Expreflions to tell
you how much I am eijlav'd by your Beauty. If
I were now in my Poetick Vein, I should proclaim
to all the World, that the red-hair'd Charioteer of
the Day, meaning the Sin,, quitted the Ocean last
Evening, where he uses to solace himself in the
Arms of his beloved Thetis, to sport away the
Night in that fortunate River where CaliJto was
bathing her self. Heavens how often was it in
my Thoughts to plunge Head foremost into the
Water after you, and try the Adventure of the
Nymph Salmacis. But, Madam, as these were
U:e fir/l Motions of my Paifion, so they are excil-

D d f.ble,

fabl, because the wisest Philosopher upon Earth
is not Master of them. The next Moment I made
' fomefber Reflecions upon this Design, andmuft

own I was terribly afraid of you, altho' you were
lzaked and difarm'd, and carry'd not that irmer.
cifulFly-flap about you, with which you use to
coi-reS the Infolencies of my Hand, when it pre.
fumes to touch your Bubbies, or examine the
Fringe of your Petticoat. After all, Madam, 'tis
more for your Advantage, than you are aware of,
that I fim you last Evening; for whenever you
act the reserved, I must own you carry Treafires
about you, that deserve to be well look'd after,
and not expos'd to lfctrc7ify'd Eyes. Having seen
the Beauties of your Body, I cannot but approve
the Severity of your Soul; therefore you need
not quarrel with me for presuming to fee you,
since it turns so much to your Advantage.

A Billet from Calif/o to the Author.
She is angry with him for nmt knowing her at a

MaIfquerade.
YO U are a Man of the least Gallantry that

ever was known. I am inform'd that a La.
dy in a Masque, and who, -aotwithftanding her.
Disguise, feen'd to be well-jflap'd enough, took
you fdJ.e Yesterday from your Company, and
said a hundred obliging Things to you, to all
w;hich you replv'd so coldly and dully, that the went
aay a ery
v il-jftisj,'d with you. This Lady had
1in indifFerent good Opinion of your Wit before, and
had the GChaty to think you nright a& your Part
tolerably vell in a Frolick of this Nature; bat

3,0:j

you have mofi effecually undeceiv'd her. As this
Lady's Sentiments are always the fame with mine,
don't come to tell me any more Stories of your
Prowess, for I hfall certainly fend youlback to the
Lady in the Masque.

The AutJor's Answer.
D Efore I receiv'd your Billet, I was told that
.) you; were at the fiie Masquerade last Night,
nay, that you were' the very Person with whom I
difcoirs'd fo'long. tBut why should you think it
frange that I did not''ilovi you, you that never
spoke four kind Words to me in all your Life,
and then entertain'd me with so much teeming
Tenderness ? In short, your Soul was infinitely
more difgrlis'd, than your Face, f6 that had your
Masque been off, I houild never have been able to
know you, through f6 much Foldnefs and good
Nature. I should have sworn, that my very
Eyes deceiv'd me, and.that it was not Califto that
talk'd to me. Since I'was taken up with these
Thboights, judge you, whether all the; Loft Expref-
lions and Carefles'of a Stranger were like to operate
with me, and whether I was in a Humour to begin
an dmour with a Person, who feem'd to have some
wicked Designs upon your Property. Thus you
cou'd not but observe with what Iidiference I en-
tertain'd you, so that, my dear Califzo, instead of
complaining of me, I think you ought to com-
mend my Fidelity, and from thence conclude, that
you have no Rival to apprehend.

Dd~ 4
Dd v

A Letter of jEN EAS SYLV1US, ivho wvas

afterwards Pope PI s the Second, to his
Father, about a Bajlard-Son, whom hef3n
to hitm.
Translated from the Latin, by Mr. T. Brown.

En7. Sylv. Oper. p. I .. Edit. Baflt.
OU fend me Word in your last, That you
could not tell whether you were to rejoice, or
grieve at the late Present that Providence made me
o: a Son. For my Part, I fee Reason enough for
the former, but not the least Pretence for the
latter: For. tell me, what prettier Sport is there,
than for a Mlan to beget lis own Likeness ? Or
what more refreshing Sight can there be, on this
Side Heaven, than to fee ones Table well ftock'd
with O(live-brauches ? As for my self, without
blufhlig, I own to you, That 'tis an unfiieaka.
ble Pleasure to me,. to find, that I have riot be.
itow'd my Pains in a barren Soil; ;and I daily
return my Thanks to Heaven, for fending me no
cloven P;refnt, no whimpering, filly Girl, but a
fine chopping, lusty Boy, ,vho will help to divert
yo.u and my M.other, with his innocent. Prattle.
iNow, Sir, if you tonk any Satisfaction at m)
Birth, why ihou'd not the Cockles of your old
Heart dance upon this Oc-cafoli ? Or why shou'd
.you not be as well pleas'd to behold my Picdure in
a Granl-fon ? But, plrrhaps, you'll tell me, That
your Conlietce is foin'.l:hat uneafie, because the
poor Child was begotten in Sin, and out of the
Pale of Matrimony. If the Shoe pinches you there,
I mult ask you a few civl Questions before we
part. Pray, Sir, what Mat;rials was I coimpos'd

of?

          

of? As I take it, I am not made of Stone, or Iron,
or any such unrelenting Ingredients. You begot
me true Flefhl and Blood; and, if I have commit-
ted any Crime, in making Use of my Parts, I'll
c'el place it to your Score; for I'll swear I had
all the peccant Utensils from you. In the next
Place, do but confider how it was with your self,
at nmy Years: You know well enough, without
my refrelhing your Memory for you, that you
never lay under the Scandal of a Fumbler. I am
your own lawful Son ; no Blot to your Family,
I hope: No Eutincb, or any Thing like it. Neither
am I Hypocr.te enough, to pretend to more Sanetity,
than the reft of my Neighbours. I frankly
own, I have been a Trefpaufer, a vile abominable
Trefpafier in my Time ; but, to my great Com-
fort, David and Solomon went the fame Road be-
fore me: And, as I am modest in my own Nature,
a Curse light on me, if ever I desire to be thought
holier than King David, or wiser than his Son. If
'tis a Sin, it can fay Abundapce of ihrewd Things
for it felt; it can plead Antiquity and Univerfa-
lity, and quote the Lord knows how many Texts
out of the new and old Tefiament; and, to deal
plainly with you, I don't believe there's one Mal
between the two Poles, unless he has a very fcur-
vy confounded Body indeed, that has not, at one
Time or another, been guilty of it in Thought, or
Deed. This Corruption (if it may be call'd a
Corruption for a Man to imlploy his Natural Ta-
lent) is of all Countries and Regions: But, under-
the Rose, Sir, why shou'd Copulation be treated
with such ill Language, as generally 'tis ? Or whyl
ihou'd our CafifiJfs o furiously condemn it, since
Nature, that never does any Thing in vain, has
interwovell this Appetite with our very Conflitu-
tions, a(la infpir'd the whole Creation with an eter-
nal Desire to continue their owrn Species ? But, I

D d
c supr

suppose, you'll reply, That there are certain Li?
mits within which 'tis lawful, and that this Ation
ought never to be done without the Church's Con.
sent. Well, for once, let us take it for granted,
that Man, ought never to get up and ride, with.
out the Pries's Benedition: But how does this
mend the Matter ? Was there never any Sin, do
you think, committed within the matrimonial
Sheets? I hope, old Gentleman, you'll not ad.
vance such false Doctrine as that is. There are
six'd Rules too for our Eating and Drinking; but
what Man, in a thousand, is such a slavish Cox-
comb, as to be confin'd to them ? Some whining
grave Rascals may tell you, they were never guil-
ty of Sin, and demurely wipe their Mouths after
they have said it; but I hate all Liars; and since
I carry human Infirmities about me, scorn to con.
ceal or deny them: So much for this Point. But
because you seem to distrust, that other People
have had a Finger in the Pye, and wou'd fain be
satisfied, whether the Child really belongs to me
or no pray, Sir, be pleas'd to take this short
History of the whole Affair. I had been Etvoy at
trasburgb some two Years, and, as it happen'd,
had no great Business upon my Hands, when a
Woman, newly arriv'd from England, who had
-Youth and Beauty enough to please a nicer Palate
than mine, chanc'd to cometo the fame Inn where
I lodg'd: She spoke the Italian Tongue perfectly
well, and 1 had a long Conversation with her in
that Language, which was so much the more eln
tertaining to me, because I so little expected to
meet one, that underflood Italian in those Parts of
the World. In short, what with her ft/it and
Beauty, she gain'd an absolute Ascendant over my
Heart; so that, as often as I beheld her, I cou'd
not help thinking on the famous Cleopatra, who,
chiefly with the Gaiety and Charms of her Dif-

course,

course, made such a Pair of Asses of Jrulius Cefar.
and .lark Atto;ly. Thought I to my self; who
can blame such an inconsiderable diminutive SeI-
lowv as I am, for doing what the molt illustrious
Hero's of Antiquity have jufrify'd by their own
Examples ? Sometimes I supported my self by the.
Precedent of MoJes, sometimes of .iriflotle, and.
sometimes by famous Instances in the Christian
Church. To make short of my Story, I was
pafilonately in Love with this Belle Traimon-
tane, and attempted her with all the Rbetorick
I was Mailer of. But she, deaf to my Vows and
Pasion, flighted all my Protestations; so that,
for three long-liv'd Days, (an Age in the Chroni-
cles of Love) I found I had made little or no Pro-
grefs in her Affections. Whether this was the Es-
fed of her Virtue, her Fear, or Difcretioe, I won't -
be positive, but am incdin'd to the latter. For, as
it appear'd, she flood in some Awe of the House,
from whom she expected certain Kindneifes.

The fatal Night now approach'd,and next Morn-
ing early she was to pursue her Journey. What
Fears, what Jppreheiifoizs reach'd my Soul, left the
tiarjy Ihould escape me ? I threw my self down
at her Feet, embrac'd her Knees, and conjur'd her
not to bolt her Door ; adding, that in the Silence
of the Night I wou'd ieal to her Chamber, and
give her the last Convicions, that I was her molf
devoted Vassal. She refus'd to comply with my
Desires, flood much upon her Virtne, and gave me
not the least Hopes of succeeding. I still impor-
tun'd her upon the fame Chapter, but the fill
made the fame Anfiver, and insisted upon her Vir-
tue. Well, when all the Family was gone to Bed,
said I to my self, shall I fee whether the Lady has
done as I defir'd her, or no ? All Women are Rid-
dles; perhaps the has since thought better of the
Mlatter 5 and, after all, 'tis no great Trouble to

D d 4 try

try the Experiment. Finding all was hush'd, I
grop'd my Way to her Chamber in the Dark: The
Door was fihut, but not bolted; so in I came, rulh'd
into Bed, and, after -litte foolish struggling, got
Poffeilion of her Body, the Fruit of which Night's
Work was this hopeful Boy. This merry Scene be-
fel me about the Beginning of Februamy; and nine
Months after, my dear lovely Bed-fellow, whose
Name was Betty, dropp'd in two, and was deliver'd
of the above-mention'd Babe. This Account I had
from her own Mouth at Balil, where it was my
good Fortune to meet with her again. At frft I
thought she had invented this Story, on Purpose
to wheedle a Sum of Money out of me, and gave
no great Heed to it: But then confidering, that
the Enjoyment of her at Strasburgh had not coif me
a Farthing, but only put me to the Expence of a
few foolish Oaths, and so forth, which are easily
coin'd in a Lover's Mint, I began to alter my Opi-
nion. She aced before upon a generous Principle
of Love, and no indirect mercenary Ends; there-
fore, why mhould I now fufpea her Integrity ? Be-
fides, the Time, and all other Circunftances a-
gree'd so well, that I could no longer doubt of what
the told me, especially it being at a JunCture, when
she cou'd expeo no great Matters from me. These
Reasons induc'd me to believe, that the Child was
begot with the Sweat of my Brows: Therefore,
pray, Sir, take him into your Family; bellow
some Iittle Greek and Lamti upon the young Rogue,
breed him up in the Fear of his Maker, and as-
ford him Shelter in a Garret, till he's big enough
to find the Way to his Daddy.

Farerell.

A

57
A SATYR on the WVomen

of the Town.
Ina Letter fiom N EAS SYLVIUS, after-

wards Pope PIUS the Second, to N c o-
LAUS of WATEKBUKGH.

By 3Ir. T. Brown.
T Remember the other Night you were com-

plaining to me, that you were engag'd in
the Pursuit of an Amour, and that your Mind
was so taken up, and bound with those amorous
Bands, that it was no longer in your Power to set
it at Liberty. You own'd to me, that the Objet
of your Pailion was neither Maid, Wife, nor Wi-
dow, but a Woman, who as the must be confefs'd
extreamly beautiful, was yet a mercenary Whore
that for her Price wou'd expose her self to every
Chapman. This you told me, was that which
troubled you, assuring me, that you wou'd wil-
lingly cast off this fatal Engagement, but that
you were ignorant what Measures to take to re-
gain your Liberty, and dethrone so infamous a
Paffiol, You told me, that tho' you had apply'd
your fefl to several Priests upon this Head, yet
none of them had difcover'd such Remedies'for the
Evil, as promis'd you any Hopes of Sutcefs. For
this Reason you fought of me, and, with the molt
earnest Sollicitations, prefs'd me to furnilh some
Medicine for your Disease; and that I wou'd point
you out the Path, by which you might surely

make
I _ _____ _ _

make your Escape from so terrible a Conflagra-
tion. -

I will now comply with your Desires, and will
offer you such wholefom Remedies, as mult effect
the Cure, if you will but observe my Prescription.
Nor shall I be under any Apprehension of the Phy-
fician's Foible, provided you will ad the obedient
Patient with Sincerity; altho' I am apt to believe,
that the Medicines, which were prefcrib'd by the
Priests, did by no Means wiant their Efficacy, if
you cou'd but have obferv'd their Diredions; but
the Course, perhaps, feem'd to you too violent and
severe. For when they bid you fly her, exchange
not a Word with her, nor flffer your Ears to hear
a Word spoken of her, you imagin'd these new
Precepts too hard for mortal Fleih to obey. With
the fame Reluctance, a Wretch in a Fever hears
his cool Draughts forbid; yet if he designs to re-
cover, he mult keep to his Physician's DireEtions.
Thus, my dear liMcolas, if you will make your
Escape from Love, and regain your wifh'd-for
Freedom, prepare your self to lifen to, and know
these Precepts I ifall give you.

Know then, that you are now infected with a
moit dangerous Distemper, and that there is no
Way of recovering your Health, but by undergo-
ing many Fevers, and difficlt Operations. For, my
dear Friend, every Man who is in Love, is lick;
nay, not only sick, but in Slavery, and pogefs'd
with a perfect Madness. I speak of unlawfjl Love;
for it is a Vertue, not a Vice, to love God, our
Parents, Country, Wife, and Children: This is
the full State of Health, ndt that of Sickness.
Yonr Cafe is very different; for vou are in the
Pursuit of inlawrfil Love. But, tell me, what do
vou believe this z7larwful Love, of which we speak,
is? The Ancients held him to be a little, naked,
lind Boy, born of Vieds and wYilcam, with Wings

at

at his Back, and Arrows in his Hands, with which
pricking and wounding the Bofonis and Hearts of
Men and Women, he infus'd into the Wounds the
Ardor of Love. Thus Virgil:
N.ow do I know what 'tis, that Love we alne,
Born among Rocks, from Rhodope he camle,
Or Thracian Ifinarus, or Garamant extream: S
Not from our Race has fpnmg the fatal Boy,
Iho only does our Happiness destroy, &c.
But this was but the vain Day-Dream of mor-
tal Wights, who wand'ring in the Miff of Ig-
norance, cou'd not arrive at the Truth. LOVE, as
Senca has it in his Tragedies, is nothbig else blt a
cfrtain Force and great Energy of Aind d; a kindly
Heat of Touth, begot by LUXURY and IDLENESS, and
is nrs'd and fofter'd up by the Ease and Plenty of a
flowing Fortunae. This robs a Man of his Under-
standing, perverts his whole Judgment, flupifies
the Senses, and extinguishes the Soul. For when
you love a Woman, your Life, your Soul dwells
in her, and not in your self. What therefore can
be a more wretched State, than not to live while
you are alive; or to have the meer Fundions
of Life, without the Benefit ? Than to have the
Senses, without Sensibility ? Than to have Eyes,
and fee not ? And Ears, and yet not be able to
hear ? A LOVER is transform'd by an unhappy
Metamorphosis into another vMan; he neither
speaks, nor ats as he was wont to do. From.
hence that of Parm7cino in Tere:ce --Te Gods ! fays
he, what Sort of Diflemper is this I have got ? '-e
AMen us'd to be Jo thang'd by Love, that no one can
kaow 'em to be the fame Pefons ? The comick Poet,
you find, thinks LOVE aDDifeafe; nor is his Sen-
timent witholit Reason: For Hippocrates, in MAa-
Cotils, calls Lvxwyy (either the Mother or Daugh-

tcr
59

ter of love) a Part of the most desperate Malady.
This Distemper is generally the Companion of
YOUTH; but it likewise vexes Men of middle and
old Age. And by so much is the Disease both the
more virulent, dangerous, and ridiculous, by how
much the Party aftected is the more eminent in
Knowledge or Years.

Since therefore you are taken Captive by Love,
and are his VafTal confefs'd, know that you are
ick. But if you are lick, make it your Endeavour
to get a Cure: For where is there any Man, who
is afflicted with a Disease, who wou'd not be cur'd ?
Certainly the greater, more virulent, and dange-
rous the Disease is, by so much the more earnest
is the Care and Desire of the Patient for a Reme-
dy. Your Sicbiefs is great, let your Care of your
Recovery be as great. Think, my dear Friend,
think in what Condition you are. You value not
your self at all; you are not at all concern'd a-
bout whatever may befal you ; your whole Mind
is fi'd on your Mifirefs; her it is you love she
is the Object of your nightly Slumbers ; Of her is
your Discourse ; and she it is that swells up all
your languishing Sighs; and every'Thing you do,
serves only to renew your Memory of her. Be-
hold the most pestiferous Folly, jMadnefs, and
Disease in the World! Do you yet think, that
there is no Need of feekiilg after a Cure ? Who,
in such a Difiemper as this, wou'd not dcfire the
Return of his Heath ?

But, my dear Friend, these are the Medicines
necefahry For your Health; which if you make
Use of, you fliall again be a found Man; but it
you neglect temin, your Disease ;ill accompany
you to your Grave, nor is there apy one that can
help yrou. The first and most necefTary Ingredi-
ent, is the Reflectiin, how far you have receded
r--:n t'he Precepts of God, whom, when you ought

ts

to love with your whole Heart, and your whole
Strength, you have diverted your Passion to a
Creature, and in her have you plac'd all your De-
light; and thus you are fall'n into the Worship
of Idols; for he that prefers the Creature to the
Creator, is an Idolater. You will, perhaps, de-
ny your being an Idolater, as not preferring the
Created to the Creator; but if you cou'd be brought
to speak the Truth, you wou'd fairly confess, that
you love your Mitrefs more than God himself; as
indeed the Effeet will demonstrate; for you are
negligent of what God commands, that you post-
pone and contemn but you take Care to execute
the Commands of your Miltrefs, with the utmost
Diligence; and this very Thing is to prefer a
Kloman to God. Alas! how great an Evil is it,
how dangerous, how detestable, to love a Creaturle
to that Excess, that, in the Ballance with her,
you value not the God that made you, at all!
God, when you were Nothing, gave you a Being,
made you capable of knowing the divine Sacra-
ments, and the Path to Heaven; but your Mi-
ftreis has perverted you from that noble rational
Animnal, that God had made you, to the Brute,
and leads you through the Mytteries of Iniquity,
to the ready Path to Hell. This fame good God,
when you and the reft of Mankind had, by the
Tranfgreioon of your first Parents, loft Paradise,
vouchlafed to be borh for you; to be made Man,
to be taken into Custody, to be scourg'd, difgrac'd,
and at lait crucify'd, and dy'd to redeem you with
his precious Blood: Confider what a monstrous
Ingratitude it is, what Iniquity, what Inhuma-
nity, what Barbarity, to relinquilh and detlrt
him, who has done all this for you, for a vile,
rorttblefs WoMr AN ! This is, or ought to be fuffi-
cient to move you, and all other CriJfii4i to
quit ?1il.wfli Loves, and to serve God alone,

Bu t

But, my Friend, let me intreat you to confi.
der farther, what it is you do. You fay, your
Mifirefs is beautiful, is charming in your Eye,
nay, in Reality: Do you believe she will always
be thus beautiful and charming? Beauty, as the
Tragick Poet fays, is a fleeting Good ; arid the Wo.
man, that to Day is so inchanting, to Morrow
may fright you; her Charms in a Moment are
chang'd into Deformity; and she passes insensibly
from an Angel to a Devil. Why are you so very
ill a Husband ? Why osso weak and foolish a Con.
duet, to barter your lasting, your permanent per.
petual Goods, for such perishable Commodities ?

But let us grant what you fay, and allow, that
her Form, her Beauty, is admirable and furpri-
zing; that is but a trifiing Advantage, a Good of
no Value, a meer tinsel Bauble, and glares, and
is without any infinite W6rth. A Woman's Beau-
ty, unless adorn'd with Charity, is of no Price;
for that is the true Praise of a Woman, not her
Form or Beauty. But you pursue her not for her
Cbaftity, you are not enamour'd of her firtue, but
her Looks: And those, alas! have but a fading
fhort-liv'd Glory, a Flower, that, like a Rose,
bluthes with Crimson in the Morning, and lan-
guifhes, and dies with the Evening Sun. There is
nothing more beautiful, or has greater Charms,
than Vilrtt and Honour, if you cou'd with a serious
View, look wifely on them with the Eye of your
Mind, you wou'd confess them infinitely more
transporting than your Mifircfs. Not Lucifer,
in his Morning-Beams, nor Hefpe1us, in his Even-
-ing-Glory, has half the Beauty that is in Virtle
or Honoul; which whoever forsakes for a T/omaln,
I beg you reflec, how mad and diftraeed he
must be.

But, my dear Friend, that I may not multiply
W ords with you, the Woman you doat on is not

yours
62

yours alone, but several moreare admitted into
her Arms: Nor can her Love be so confin'd to you,
but that she has some till to spare to bellow in the
Caresses of her other Admirers. W hat can you do
in the Crowd of her Customers ? Remember you
are now in the Evening of your Age; that you
are old, nay, on the Verge of Life, and almost
within the harder Embraces of Death it self.
Confid.r, Are you qualify'd for the Combats of
the Fair ? Can you enter the Lifts of the Strong
and Robust ? What seek you in that Fight, where
the Vidor falls to the Ground ? You will find it a
difficult Matter for an old Man to carry off the La-
dy from the Toung. But suppose you are of Strength
sufficient to bear off the Prize, when it is the ve-
ry Nature of the Fight, that he that conquers, is
only lat slain. For what is a Woman, but the Spoi-
ler of the Toung, the Pillager of the 3Middle-ag'd, and
the Death of the L D ? The Devourer of our Estates,
the DefjruSion of our Honour, the Fodder of the De-
vil, the Gate of Death, and the Supplement of Hell ?

Recollec, my dear Friend, recolled what nu-
merous Evils have from Women sprung Since
Solomon, Holoferlnes, ,Sampson, were deceiv'd by
IVoman, do you think your self so well fortisy'd,
as not to be abus'd by her? But by how much
more weak, incautious, and imprudent you are,
than those Men, with so much the more Care re-
move your self from a State of being fubje& to
their Deceit, againit which they could not defend
themselves. A Woman's sinful Love is of no Va-
lue. In such a Woman, there is no Stability, no
Constancy: She who seems fond of you to Day,
to Morrow will be so of another; perhaps laughs
the Moment you have left her, with her young
Gallant, at your Dotage. What Esteem can you
have for that Love, which is divided into so many
Shares ? There never was yet a Woman found

whose

whole Love was so sincere, but wou'd change for
the Addrefles, Gifts, and Prayers of a new
Lover.

A Woman is an imperfect Animal, various, fal-
lacious, subject to a thousand Diseases, and a thou.
sand turbulent Pailions; without Faith, without
Fear, without Constancy, without Piety. I speak
of those Women, who admit of criminal Pailions.
These are never six'd and liable i for when once
they have deviated from the Paths of Right, they
think themselves free to ramble as they please , and
fland no longer in Fear either of their Husband,
or their Friend. I cannot imagine, that the fil.
thy Pleasure of Coition, can now be delightful to
you, who are almost exhausted with old Age.
For what Advantage can that foolith, naty Plea-
sure bring to you, who are old and dry ? Or even
to Youth, that is moist and dry, iince Repentance
treads on the Heels of the Fact ? Is not that Ad-
monition, Citation, or certain Change, which
troubles and vexes the Mind immediately after
the Comriffilon of the Fad, of some Weight in
your Consideration? How wicked is the Man,
that on so many Admonitions does not yet give
over his Folly Who mends not on Puniihment,
nor grows better by Correction ? What does that
carnal Act produce, but the Ruine of the Flesh?
i with indeed nothing perished by it but the FIle),
and that it did not likewise kill the Soul! But
when the Man and Woman are in this Conjunction,
they seem to me to be like two earthen Vessels,
which are rubb'd against one another 'till they
break, and are crumbled into nothing.

But, perhaps, you are not taken up with the
Enjoyment of your MiJlref's Person, but only arc
pleas'd to look upon her, and hear her talk. But
pray tell me, what do her Looks carry in them so
very transporting, but that you may elsewhere

nsid

find something as beautiful ? The Beauty.that wv
ought to seek and admire, is In Heaven, with
which hithing in this World can compare 3 in
those is all Perfeaion, in these perpetual Defets;
those are perpetual, these frail and fhort-!iud;
those are six'd, these fleeting. This Form,. which
you so much admire, a Fever will fleal away ,
but if it be spar'd by the Disease, old Age will be
sure to make an End of it which will render that
Face, so juicy, plump, and blooming now, in
a little Time ploughed up with Furrows, and
drain'd of all its Moisture, wither'd and dry'd.
And those fine Limbs, which so take your Eyes,
and infatuate your Heart, Time will dry up,
blacken, and defile with Sores and putrid Ulcers,
and quite transform into 'another Figure. Those
sprightly Eyes, which now shoot such killing
Glances, will not always do so; the Time will
come, when they will be meer beamlefs Fires, weak
and dead, all dimn and faded, unmoving and un-
minded. That Mouth, which now breaths all
the fragrant Odours of the spicy East, will dart a
poisonous Stench, likeftinking Vaults or Carrion:
That Neck, that bears it self up with such a fiate-
ly Pride, will bend beneath the Weight of Years,
and veil the Honours of the Head it bears now so
lofty, in a weak, trembling, and crooked Bow,
down to the veryBreaft.: And all that lovely Bo-
dy sequacious to the Touch, so finely turn'd, so
plump, so warm, so juicy, will become a cold,
Ihrivell'd, dry'd, sapless Trunk, if her Vices at-
tend the lazy Punimflnent of old Age for her Fol-
lies, and other Diseases carry her not off, in a
more loathrome Condition, in her Youth.

Let thfee Things seriously fink into your Mind,
and cut off the fallacious Promises of Hope. Fly
from her before {he flies from you for it is much
better to contemn a Thing, than lose it. But I

Ee I am

I am wonderfully furpriz'd to hear you talk of
being strangely pleas'd with her melting, sweet,
charming, and mellifluous Tongue, when she
speaks. For what can a Woman's Discourse, in it
self, have sweet or alluring ? What does your
Miitrefs fay to you ? Either she complains, grieves,
tfreatens, flatters, or tells you idle Tales; re-
peats what some neighbouring Female did, or
what her Dream was; how many Eggs her, Hen
has laid, and of what Flowers her Nosegay is
compos'd the Colour of her Knots, Furbelo's,
Flounces, and all the filly Whirfies of Mode and
Falhion. All the Discourse of a Woman, is of
fame flight, .vain, foolish Thing, or other; which
to be pleas'd with, a Man must be guilty of as
much Levity as fe. Sometimes she tells you her
Affairs with some other Lover; as how they lay,
the Manner they embrac'd, what Gifts he gave
her, what Supper he treated her with, and what
Joys and Transports she found.in his Arms but
this, methinks, shou'd rather give you Pain, than
Pleasure. Or, perhaps, she tells you, how much
The loves you, how ihe prefers you to. all her
younger Admirers; how agreeable your silver
Hairs and Beard are; that your Arms tremble with
Eagerness, not Age; that the Fewness and Weak-
ness of your amorous Efforts, is the Effea of De.
fre, not Impotence; that your hollow Cheeks and
Eyes, are the Beds for Cupid and the Graces; your
toothless Gums, agreeable as the Coral and. Ivory
of Youth ; that your cadaverous Smell, is a Per-
fume of jArbia; that she hkes' tontb, is fond of
Age, and only admires you; and yields otnly to the
Neceflity of her Fortune, when: she admits any
other in your Place. But this,.my Friend, is
impofng on your Understanding, and is a Wheedle
so nauseous, that Folly' it self can't sure take a
Pleasure in it; being a Banter on common Sense,

the

the Cant of her Profession, and an Abuse to your
Face.

But let the Pleasure you take in her Discourse
be what it will, can you be so mad, and so far
out of your Senses; as not to take more Delight
in the Discourse of some learned and ingenious
Man? Reflet, take a View of all that is plea-
sing and' comfoitable in Love, and then of all that
is troliblefo and grievou, you'll find the former
few, the latter so many, that you will agree with
his Opinion, who said, Love was a little Drop of
Honey mix'd with Abundance of Gall. Since
therefore, my Friend, all Love (of which we talk)
is vain, fiort, bitter, and- damable, and- finks a
Man into molt deplorable Diseases, you mult take
Care to'be deliver'd from it.
But tlie Cure is this, that you perfwade your
self, and convince your Mind, that Love is an
Evil: After. which, avoid your Mifirefs's Syrien
Tongue; fly Idleness, be always doing some-
thing; afTociate with-good Men, by whom you
may profit; frequent no Play or Sport, nor any
Feast or Entertainment. If you have any Presents
of your Mifrefs, throw 'em from you; have no-
thing in your Power, that ever belong'd to her ,'
believe her to be the Devil's Meflenger, that wou'd
deitroy your Person and Happiness. Keep in youre
Memory the Benefits you have receiv'd from CbrijI;
reflec on the Cceleftial Rewards of those, who do
well, and the infernal Punishments of those, who
do ill. Remember, that your Days are every
Dayfewerin Number, and that your last Day is
juAf thrufiing: into your Company. Refled how
ridiculous -aThing it is to be in Love, especially a
Man of mature Years, and pall the inconiiderate
Heats of Yduth. Think of the fickle Temper of
Woman; think of the Loss of your Time, than
which nothing is more precious think of the

E e 2 iWafte

Waste of your Fortune, which is not easily re.
pair'd; think that the Life, that we live in this
World, is but extreamly fliort, tho spent in Plea.
sure it self; and that in the other World, which
we seek, has no End.

If you carefully, and seriously think of these
Things, and make them throughly enter into
your Mind, and retain those Precepts I have gi.
ven, you will soon banish that Love, which now
torments you, and will prove your self a Man
grateful to God, and worthy of Heaven. Fare.
well.

LETTER XLV. Ed. Bafl.
2Eneas Sylvius, Poet Laureat,

and Imperial Secretary, to
Petrus Noxetanus, Health.
A Perfiafive to marry the W7oman he had lain

with: The Praise of UNION, and Conduz
of a FOREIGNER mzz any Princes Court.
I On my Obligation to my good Friend Cam-

pijir, for his engaging you to write to me;
but then pray be not you less grateful, who owe
him ten Times as much. After a tedious Silence,
he got me your Letter; but ftray'd and wander'd
from your Nature, he pick'd you up, and reftor'd
you to your elf. Who fo.agreeable, communica-
tive, and complaisant as you, in your own Tem-
per ? But some strange Chagrin or other, had ftol'n
you away, and loft you in a Forgetfulness of your

'.~ - ,Friends,

Friends, and an odd, fullen, ill-natur'd Silence:
No more like the honest Peter I always knew you,
than . Carthiqian is like a Cavalier. But well fare
the Heart of honest Ca7pijius, who, by refroring
your former good Temper, has given me new
Life. I was on my last Legs, gasping, giving up
the Ghost, for want of the Cordjal of your'Cor-
refpondence ; but this Letter has set me up again,
given me new Life, and made me a found Mal
again. 'Tis true, ev'n this Comfort is not with-
out Pain, the Remedy is not without its Bitter s
but it is like the disagreeable Relish of a Potion,
it cures my Mind, while it disgusts my Taftee
for what disquiets you, must make me uneasy.
But I have my Refuge-till, by giving more Cre-
dit to others in your Affairs, than to your self:
Difpozdence or .Airanlce always mingles in our
Accounts of our selves, according to our Temper.
But I fppofe you do like a true Man of Courage,
not magnifying your self, and averse to Thrafo-
nical Rbodonmo7itado's. Thus you tell me, you are
poor, whilst Camnpili[[s assures me you are rich,
and Caftellanns confirms his Report. But you may
be both in the Right, you may be rich in Fadt,
and poor in ,Spirit, or you may be poor in 'Opi-
nion ; or you may disguise your real Wealth un-
der the Pretence 6f Poverty, as not avaritious of
Vain-glory, or not valuing your self on Riches.
Perhaps in Affluence, you fix not your Mind on
your Poflelions; or you may not be content with
what you have, or do not make Use of it; and
that is indeed to be poor with a Vengeance; but
this you.are Master of too good Sense to be guil-
ty of: It is the Vice of Fools, and cannot there-
fore be your Curse. .But be it as it will, 'tis no-
thing to me, to whom you are equally valuable
in Poverty and Wealth. I lov'd you for your
Vertue, not Bags 5 and therefore while you retain

E e 3 th-t.

that, Affluence and Necessity are the fame Thing
to me, my Love and Value are the fame; what.
ever belongs to Fortune, has no Influence on the
Endowments of the Mind. As for your Father
and Childrens being on your Hands, Nature and
Gratitude oblige your Care. And tho' there are,
and have been Monfiers in the World, who have
broke through theeternal Bands, that tye Palents
and Children together, and run to that Excess, to
destroy the very Source of their Being yet no-
thing so black and infamous can affect you, or
render theDuties of Nature uneasy. But letting
these Things pass, I come to a Part of your Let-
ter, which I confess made me do more, than smile;
for I cou'dnot forbearlaughing at what you writ
about your Philocim, or if you had rather have
her call'd your Atiphila. And your two Letters
made me fancy my self converting with my old
Friend and Acquaintance, honest Terence, of Poe-
tical, tho' Pag.an Memory 3 for fometnies you
iecm'd to me to be P.iampbilus, sometimes EfJcimls,
and sometimes Cli7ias. But yet I comfort my self;
that your Luck has not been so damnably bad in
this amorous Affair, iince you have met with a Girl
to your Heart's Content, of a good Eaucation,
tolerable Qualities, agreeable Humour, complai-
sant to your Temper, obsequious to your Will and
Commands, and not a termagant damn'd Virago,
that wou'd fight for the Breeches, and follow the
wicked Devices of her own Inclinations, and lead
you a Life that is worse than the Gallies ; that
.,ou'd ring you a Peel from Morning to Night,
and can then allow you no Reft, what betwixt im-
portunate Duns for conjugal Duty, and new
Cloaths. I 'prethee then leave off this Cant of
Poverty, and no Bowr, since I hope, my dear
Friend, you deign not to take her Bags for better
and for worse, but her Person i since yop purpose

to

to wed soft Flesh and Blood, and not the glitte-
ring Metal. As for my own Part, all that I
shou'd desire in a Wife, is, 'that she shou'd be hand.
fom, young, and good humour'l, fruitful, and
confin'd to me alone i free from wanrdring Desires,
at least free from rambling in Action ; tho', I am
afraid, it wou'd puzzle a Logician to separate the
Desire, and the Actibn in a Woman. For when
once a Wyoman has got it in her Head, Opportuni-
ty is only wanting to have it somewhere else;
and that is a Defect her Indufry for her Pleasure,
will easily supply. But as I was faying, all I
shou'd demand in a Wife is Beauty, Chastity,
good Humour, and Fertility. For, believe me,
my good Friend Peter, Experto crede Roberto, give
Credit to my Observations, a great Fortune in a
Wife brings a great many Inconveniencies, A
Woman, that brings a large Portion, thinks Ihe
mayr do what she pleases ; fhe'llbe drunk, proud,
haughty, imperious, impertinent, saucy; she'll
think ihe may make bold with your Bed, when
Ihe supports your Grandeur; ihe'll think she may
fay any Thing, when fle furnifies your Equi-
page 5 he'll scold when she pleases, and that is as
often as her Inclinations shall lead her, by your
Disquiet, to make room for her Gallant; she will
have a Tongue with such an everlasting Twang,
that a Husband may find as much Ease in a Crowd,
and Quiet in a Paper-mill. Others are deform'd
sickly, barren, and have a thousand other De-
fess, from which you know your defign'd Wife
is free. What an odd fantaflick Whim is it there-
foie for you to hanker after t-e frothy Trifle at
a Feat, when you may fill your Belly with good
substantial Food? You like her Person, but find
Fault with her Poverty; that is, you are pleas'd
with what ihe has, and are vex'd at what she has
not. I prithee, Friend Peter, remember you have

E 4 a corn-

a comfortable Modicum, enough to make the
Pot boil and blessed be Providence you have a
good Place, which with the tollerable Manage.
ment of the Age, may turn to a pretty Account.
If Realon will not fatisfy.you, let Example direct
you: The Marquis of Saluces pick'd up a Nut-
brown Lass from tending her Hogs, whom he
found in a Wood-where he was hunting, and pre-
fently marry'd her, to escape the haughty Pride
of a Wife or Quality. And yet this poor Coun.
try-Girl, advanc'd to the Marquis's Bed, by the
Conduc, Hurmility, and Resignation of her Hu-
mour to her Lord's, left an Example to all the
Ladies of her Time. What then have you now
to scruple in your Amour, fnce you find Princes
themselves leading you the Way, and showing
what you shou'd do for your own Happiness ? I
muff tell you, dear Friend of mine, if what you
write be true, if the Girl be so sequacious of your
Humours, agreeable to your Inclination, and
pleating to your Relish, I wou'd not have you
defer the Matter. Delays are dangerous; and the
Liquor often pails, while you preach o'er your
Can; or your Neighbour, that is,more thirfly,
may drink offyour Glass. Beides, I wou'd have
you confider, t'at you have better Luck, than
most People meet with, who design a Voyage to
the Island of'.Matrimony; you have had a Samldle
of the Commodity you design to buy, before you
part with your Money. You have try'd how and
how, before you venture on Matrimony: Nay,
rou can scarce fay, For better, and for worse, when
you know alreadyjrow Matters fiand; and buy
not a Pig in a Poke, like your Neighbours. Most
Men are cheated in the Barter; for they, good
credulous Souls, marry their Wives, before they
know whether they are Fiji7, Fle/), or good red Her-
ung. 'Tis true. they' meet, perhaps, with a

fprarkling

sparkling Eye, a pretty pouting Mouth, an arti-
ficial Complexion, and the like: But the Devil
in't, is, that a fine Face to a Woman, is often
like a fair carv'd Sign to a Tavern, it serves to
draw you in; but then you find nothing but
stumm'd Claret, and other diabolical Mixtures.
'Tis like the Gilding to a Pill, the Gold makes
the nauseous Dose go down, which without it you
vou'd keck at. Thus a gaudy Outside often sets
off secret Defes : The silk embofs'd Mantoj and
lac'd Petticoat frequently cover crooked or. gouty
Legs, and boulfter'd Shoulders, besides nameless
Evils more difagreable. Paint and finetYafjs iham
a Complexion, which is none of their own ; and
those Bubbies, which seem full and swelling in
Stays, fall down flabby and lank, when the La-
dy's undreft : The Disguise thrown off, the Mon-
ter appears; and when you hope to press a God.
defs, you find an Incubus in your Arms. But there
are Evils you cannot dread in A-ttipbila; you
know the snowy White of her Body, is of a Piece
with her Face and Bosom; you know the Sym-
metry and Proportion of her Parts, the round
Hardness of her Breaffs, theFullnefs of her Thighs,
the easy Swelling of her Belly, and all those' id-
den Beauties of her Person, that are inyifible to
all besides, you know to be wonderfully and real-
ly transporting. You have experienced the Vi.
gour of her Embraces, endearing, aftive, fpright-
ly, ated by Nature, not Art, nor yet insipid,
languid, and dull. Yes, yes, dear Friend of
mine, Women commonly hide such Defects in an
agreeable Appearance, that after the first Hyme-
neal Rites are over, come to Light, and give such
a Disgust, that instead of a 'Heaven, they are a
perpetual Hell to their Hulfbands all their Life as-
ter. I tell you truly, I form my Judgment of
others by my flf,. who have seen, and known,

and

and lov'd many a Bona Roba, whom after En.
joyment I cou'd heartily have kick'd 5 and the
Pleasure of the Chace has been deftroy'd, by the
Difagreablenefs of the Quarry : Nor were I ever
so desperate as to think of committing Matrimo.
ny, wou'd I like a Wife, whom I had not been so
very familiar with, as to know her. intis 5 in
cute, that is, perfectly well in all her Paces be.
fore-hand. I am a true Plai-deale:, I hate to
mince the Matter with a Friend. These are my
Sentiments of the Point, and these were wont to
be yours. You us'd to declare, that you wou'd
not sacrifice your Liberty to any Woman, but
lhe who shou'd have Cause to own, that she was
infinitely oblig'd to your Generosity. Well, you
have now found just such a Woman, according to
your Heart's Desire: Why, the Devil, an't you
happy while you may ? What makes you stumble
at the Gate of Bliss ? Stand to your Principle,
keep to your Resolutions, or confess your self wea-
ker than a Woman,and know not what you wou'd
have. But, perhaps, you'll fay, what will the
People fay of me, to marry my Mistress? (to
give it the softest Word.) I shall be the Subjec
of ll the Lampoons of the Town, every diminitive
Wit will have a Fling at me. Terrible Bull-beg-
gars indeed! as formidable as Bevis and GaragaItiia,
'Fogh, 'Fogh ! meer Scare-Crows to fright Chil-
dren and Jack-Daws. He that is afraid of what
People will fay, he that dreads the Bounce of the
Paper-pellets, will never be easy or happy; he
can't eat, nor ink, nor sleep, nor wear his Hat;
nay, he can't so much as walk to please himself,
but if these Scandal-mongers take a Whim, 'lap-
dash he's down in Black and White. I tell thee,
dear Friend of mine, he that will govern himself
by other Folks Humours, can never be happy, nor
easy, nor constant, nor wife, nor honest. Every

Man

gan is fond of his own Doings, hisown Thoughts,
his own Humours, and every Man has a Right to
follow his own Thoughts and his own Humour;
yet if he do, another overweening Coxcomb will
find Fault and if he be curs'd with the' tch of
Rhiming, will fall upon him. Nay;f'ould you
yield to his Temper, and marry any one else,. 'tis
a thonfand to one but you are lampoon'd for mare
ryiag.at all; the Age is so abandoned, that Vir-
tue is grown a Scandal, and at this Rate you
mut turn Knave not to be taken Notice of. :Fol-
low therefore your own Inclinations, chufe your
own Pleasures, make Use of your natural Right,
as the reft of Men do; and then if Antipbila really
has your Heart, you will soon give her your Bo-
dy. If ever I have the good Fortune to feemy own
delicious Country again, to revisit the beauteous
and delightful Fields of Italy once more (which is
allin the Hands' of Fate to determine) I ihall ne-
ver think my Joys compleat, 'tillI fee you, your
dear Antipbila, your Children, Servants, Horses,
Dogs,and the reft of your domeftick Furniture, and
pass a delicious Evening or two over a Bottle
with you. But be not, dear Friend of mine,
frighten'd at a Visit from me, as if I should eat
you up with a damn'd long hungry Equipage;
for, 'Faith, I am none of those lucky Privados of
Fortune, to have such a long Train of lazy Fol-
lowers at my Heels, 'or to hope to return 'to my
Country in such a pompous Magnificence; and
indeed I {hall be very well fatisfy'd, if I can keep
the Wolf from the Door, as the Saying is. If I
can get but Money enough to defray the Expence
of my Journey, I hall think rny self as great as
the King of Persia. I thank my Stars, I am not
troubled with that .damn'd jilting Harlot Hope,
my Desires are bounded with my present Fortune;
and if any Thing else happen to fall into my

Mouth,

Mouth, it may be welcome, but not wish'd for.
You desire me to be serviceable to your Father
and that for your Sake, if I want other Motives;
but that Motive is sufficient, not only to perfwade
my Endeavours, but to compell them. But you
know, the Prince, whom I serve, declares himself
of no Party; all his Care and Study is for
UNION i nor is it fit for a Servant to desire or
urge what may be displeasing to his Mafler. And
indeed, the Emperor's Desires seem to me so rea-
fonableand so sacred, that it wou'd be a Sort of
Sacrilege to oppose them; and I have Reason to
hope, that they will be no Enemy to your As-
fairT. rs -,' o good I-ortune depznds on him, I'm
confident they il De so far from being the worser,
that they will be infinitely. ?e better: For ti',n
Courtiers and Officers gr ;'s rich and thrive , aLl
Union is eftablifh'd; which when .-ill be, I
know not. In the mean Time.. I hail insinuate
my self into the Emperor's Favour, be obsequious
to his Commands, and follow him closely ; his
Will shall direct mine, nor will I oppose him in
any Thing, or meddle with what does not imme-
diately relate to, and particularly regard my own
Interest; because 'tis a Thing of dangerous Con-
sequence for a Stranger to be too bufie with the
Affairs of a Foreign Court. I am here a Foreigner,
and therefore I comply with the Natives il what-
ever they do; I assert what'they fay, and deny
what they disallow; so that if they have any
Wisdom in their Conduct, I susser them to reap
the Benefit of it ; if they are Fools, I let them fall
by their own Folly, I am not envious of any
Man's Glory, nor wou'd I have the Infamy of any
Man's Disgrace. Whatever I'm. commanded, I
write without adding or diminishing; nor wou'd
I by Contradiction seem wiser or more foolish
than they, but ihall always be silent, fcret, and

obedient.

obedient. If this were not my Condue, I cou'd
do my self no Service here; and I'm confident,
you are too much my Friend to desire me to do
any Thing against my Interest, least being now
but very inconsiderable, I shou'd then be no-
thing at all. I shall add no more, but my De-
fire, that you wou'd write to me about your
Nuptials. Farewell.

LETTER LXXXII. Ed. Basil.
tEneas Sylvius to Mr. Fund,

Secretary of Cologne,
To comfort him for the Loss of his Mistress,

who had run away from him.
THE Secretary of Nurenmbirgb call'd on me the
T other Day, who is a Man of Probity, and
good Letters, and very much your Friend. He
told me, he had left you in a great deal of Grief;
that you had had some cruel Loss; that some-
thing, I know not what, had flip'd through your
Fingers, which gave y6u abundance of Disquiet;
na?, he tells me you are so extreamly concern'd
for this Loss, that it quite mopes you, you ut-
ter not one Word, but with more than Pytbagorick
Silence, you pass your melancholy Hours. Tho,
I could not make him explain himself but by" bro-
ken Sentences, when I prefs'd to know the Cause
of so extravagant a Sadness; yet, from what he
said, I believe I can eaiily imagine the Ground of
your Discontent, which now will admit of no

Comfort,

Comfort. For what could ever make so- trange
a- Mtamorphofis in a Man, but a
ut oman ? Youus'd
always to be a Man, anto o meet the Emergen.
cies of Fortune as a Man should; that is, as one
who had expected the Event, and was therefore
prepar'd againfi it - for the Dart foreseen, is eafi.
ly avoided. When you have loft a Friend, you
have heal'd up that Wound with a Moral That be
was born to die. When your good old Father left
this wicked World, you pacify'd the Rage of
your Grief with - .My Father hbashorw'd me an Ex-
ample that I'was begot by a Mortal, and that I minu
also die. Nay, I remember when your good La-
dy was pleas'd-to take her eternal. Leave of you,
you bore it, with as much Refignatioi, as a
young Girl the Force of the Man Ihe loves; or a
Clergy-man, a-good Benefice; or a Courtier, a
fresh Grant. 'Tis true, you put on Mourning,
and a rmful Countenance, with Hat over the Eyes,
and Looks sixd on the Ground, and all tle Pomi
pa Rogi in wonderful Decency and Order. But
dear Friend of mine, when you were come Home,
the:Relations remov'd,. and all-Friends departed
btrmyTelf; did you not fop me, and in aGlafs
os-good RheniJh- wash away your Tears, and urge
the Example of David, who. wash'd and. eat Meat
as-foon as his Child was past Recal ? I speak not
this to upbraid you, but to show that you are a
good Chriltian, for St. Panl tells usi we jbordld not
gnree for the Deadlike tbtof who have; io Hope. *Tis
true, some might be; apt to fay, the Devil's in a
Man that grieves for the Loss of a Wife,; that a
dead Wife is the best Piece of houfhold Goods a
Man can have; that it would be as-prepofterQus
to shed Tears at the interring our. Left Rib,; as to
go into Mourning for getting out of Prison, ore.
scaping a-shore from a Ship-wrack,. or from be-
ing ranfom'd from Algiers, and a thousand such

good

good Morrows. But my dear Friend John, I took
your Moderation as the Effed of your Philosophy,
not to grieve for a Loss that could not be retriev'd,
and punish your self for what you could not help.
But then I am damnably puzzl'd to reconcile
your present Conduct to your paRl. What has made
this firange Transformation in you ?' What has thus
alienated you from your own dear self? In short,
what the Devil is the Matter with you ? Have
yu had an ill Run at Play? Loft all your Rea-
y ? Have you been disappointed in forme good
Place, which you thought you were sure of? Has
any scoundrel Poet lampoon'd your Understand-
ing, or any Informer accus'd you of Bribery or
Treachery ? Or have you betraid.a- Trust with-
out a Reward fulicient to quash the Law, and
baffle your Adversary ? If none of these Things
have been your Lot, what could'you loose dearer
than a, Wife, who had brought you so many
brave chopping Boys ? Yes, a Mifirefs, young,
chaminig,. beautiful, witty, gay, wanton, a
Miltrefs of every Thing, that could give you Sa-
tisfacion and Joy. -- This is it. - I have hit
the Nail dn the Head! You are lick of Dame Eve-
Wonma's your Distemper. The fickle CELIA as gi-
vet you. the Slip, is run from your Embraces, perhaps
to the Arns of another.. ybhy, so let it be, wellfare
his Heart who has got her ! The Devil and nine Pence
go vitbh her that's iMoney and. Company, according to
the laudable Adage of the Sage Mobility ! But what in
all this can give you the Spleen _. What make you
so outragious in your Grief,: as to admit of no
Comfort ? Was ever Man troubl'd in a Tertian to
find hisAgue had lefti Bt
him you plac'd yow.
Happiness in her! She was your Soul's Delight! The
Devil ihe was ? What could my grave confidering
Friend John, at pall five and forty, place his Hap-
piness in a Woman ? And ina;young; brisk, bux-

om0

om Harlot of siteen ? Is the Inconflancy of the
Sex, after all, so little known to him, whose
Mind veers every Moment, runs round the Corn
pass, as soon as the Sun round the Earth? You
might as ealily fix the Longitude, as a Woman's
'Mind; to day she's pleas'd with the Gay, to Mor.
row with the Grave; One Hour she loves the Tall,
the next the Middle-fiz'd, and a Moment after,
a very Pigmy: Now the Fair, then the Black,
and now the Brown: Conflant to nothing long
nor pleas'd with any Thing above half an Hour,
Woman is the Whrly-Gig of Nature; Me changes
so often and swiftly, that she seldom knows her
own Mind, it's so soon alter'd from what it was,
Woman is a vain, idle, fallacious, various, cruel,
deceitful, thoughtless, giddy, ignorant Animal,
and can afford no solid Joy to a Man of conm
mon Sense. Fools themselves, Fools only can
please them; and yet 'tis more than a yolug Fool
can do to fix them to onze; what can an old one
do then? No, no, dear Friend of mine, as fickle,
and inconstant as tFomait is, tho' filewhifks round
the whole Compass to every new Pleasure, yet she
never makes a Stop at an old Maz: TWit and Age,
Learning and U;d.ejiandiig, are Points they never
turn to; I mean their Minds, their Souls (that is if
the Turks Article of Faith be not true, that they
have no Souls) their Love never turns towards
4ge, their Bodies do indeed pretty often ; but
not for Love, but MoWey; they like an old Man
fbr'a Bubble well enough, but it is because his Do.
tage urnifhes their VaYity and their LufI. My
dear Friend, we only raise a Devil we can't lay,
some young Fellow must do that; and they will
have a young Fellow, as long as they have Youth
and Beauty, and Dress, and an old Man's Purse
at Command. You and I, dear Friend of mine,
;areplaguily turn'd of the Noon of Life, we are

hastening

hafiening towards its Evening, our Sun is potting
to its Weft amain; and Women are Motes, that
love to play and gambol in its meridian Beams.
You and I have nothing to engage a young giddy
Girl full of Juice and firong Appetites, which we
have nothing to appease. You know the wife
Marcus tAlrelius had a damn'd salacious Empress,
that fought other Things, than Philofophv; and
while the good Emperor busy'd himself, and spent
his Time in writing Mlorals, Ihe emplov'd hers
more agreeably with lusty brawny-backld Fellows;
in Phyficks, or natural Expe-imen.ts. And when a
lfomnan has once given up her Virtue, 'tis in vain to
set Bounds to her Pleafires We are but a Jest to
them, and their Gallants, and all our impotent
Defects are their Diversion and Laughter: So that
I can't, for my Life, find out the Damage the
young Jilt has done you, by running away from
you. No, you have Reason to bless your Stars
for the Deliverance; and the Coxcomb, that has
her, has Reason to envy your good Luck, and
will soon with Ihe may take the fame Frolick a-
gain. She is gone to plague, and ruin some Body
else, and left you to enjoy your Quiet and your
Fortune, which the filly Jade had not Sense e-
nough to value. Rejoice, Rejoice at the happy
Chance, in fending the worst of the accursed Race
far from you, that wou'd else exhaust your Estate,
and kill your Reputation. You will be no longer
the Talk of the Town, the Jefl and Chit-chat of
the Tea-Table, and Scandal muff seek some other
Food to feed upon. The Fascination is remov'd;
be your self again, be your self again, be a Man,
and tye not your Happiness to so frail a Thread
as a rIoman's Inclinations: Corrupt, as fickle in
their Taites, and only Toys for the Leisure and
looter Hours of Youth. Let your Friend and the
'Bottle perfect the Cure, and long not for so infa-

F f mous

mous a Slavery, that your friendly Stars have re.
mov'd. Know your own Happiness, and know,
your self, and then there will be an End of your
Grief. I have ventur'd on this Way of Comfort,
because I gather'd from my Friend of Nuwe.-
burgb's Discourse, that this was your- )Pifemper.
If I am mistaken, I shall be glad of the Error.
.nd if there be any other Cause of your Sorrow,
cure your self. All Grief is alleviated by Time;
consult your own Ease and Quiet, it is the chief
Buinefs of this Life to make it agreeable; don't
you go againit Nature, and vex your self, and dif-
quiet your Days for what you cannot help. Grief
may punish your Mind, but can never retrieve
your Loss; for, as the Country-Proverb has it,
Jn brndred Pomzid of Sonrorw pays not an Ounce of oar
Debts. Farewell.
The Death of LUCKETIA. By ENEAS

SYLVIUS, Epift. 4. 1.
T Ucrtia, the Daughter of Spunris Lucretias, and
L Wife of Collatius Latinus, being ravifi'd by
8extus Tarqinius, Son of Targqin the ProudI, by
Force, and his Threats of killing a Slave, and
laying him by her dead Body, as taken in the
Sac of Adultery with her. She fends for her
Husband and Father, and rome other Relations,
and tells them the whole Affair; and having
made them promise Revenge, declares her Refou-
tiol of killing her self; from which her Father
and Husband endeavour to dissuade her, in the
folloin.g Words,

rn.

The Speech of Lucretils and Collatinus, to diffluade

Lucretia from killing her self after her Rape.
TNdulge not a Grief, Ludretia, for a Crimefo invo-

luntary; ) oul have given abundant Proofs already,
that your Afent to the Adulterer was only the Effie of
his Force, and in which your Miind bad no Share.
The Revenge, that you demand, and the Accusation you
make, are undeniable Evidence of the CoompulJion you
was under, Jince the whole might flill have remain'd a
Secret. The GConduS of your pafi Life is a fficient
Confrmation of your Innocence i through all which you
have ever appear'd a faithful and confiant Devote to
Frugality and Cha]fity, both Abroad and at Home ; in
Publick, and in the Eye of the Wtorld, and in Private,
in the mo/s secret Recefes of your .own House and Fa-
wlily. Do you not, my dear Lucretia, remember, that
the other Day when the cursed Adulterer and I came on
thee unawares, when you expe(led neither HuJiband mor
Vijitor, how did we siud thee? good Gods ! at thy Work
among thy Maids wlfahfionlably blfy ? That Day, that
Surprize gave my Lucretia the Vidtory, the Palm of
Cbhafity from all the Roman Dames. For the Daugh-
ters of the King, and the Ladies of his Family, in thb
Abffence of their HuJfbands, were found more gayly em-
ploy'd ; in Feafling and Balls, in Mirth acnd Dive;fions
fich a different Conduc made Lucretia l.ine out in a
Glory incorruptible, while the universal Consent gave
her thejfingular Lawrel of Modefly. Be not then so w7efy
at your Fate, or bend beneath the f'eight of your DiJ:
grace ; be cormfor-ted with tbi, Thought, that we will
amply revsnge Jo outragious an Injury; and he shall pay
dearfour a Pleaflire, as inperfed as unwilling, con-
flrain'd from thy Arms by the Embraces of the boise-
rous young Villain : Tou Jfall joyfully behold this impi-
ons Heir to his Father's Impieties fink under a Puni#-
ment equal, ifpoflble, to the Injury. Having, though

Fs 2

uznvillingly, fi'afted s lawleJs Appetit; wtb the Sweets
of thy lovely Body, wilt thou voluntarily add to his
Pleafnre, by fattinatg his horrid Thfii of' Blood, withb
the Sight of that precious crifonr Flood that runs tiro'
shy yVins ? Alas ! my Lucretia, is nct the FatbE; s
Crulty, amd the Son's Inhubmanity frfficieltly klotwn ?
Whbat Sltaghters among the Gabh did this Spoiler of
thy- Honwir r pe)form ? And how mayy Innocents fell
there, ViCEims to his Revenge anrd Ambition ? If you
bate this MonJfer indeed, if this Averliot to him is
from yorr Soul,' and if you are sincere in your Defres
of bis P:nijhmenrt in Perfi7onl,. live - take Care to
preserve your Life, that, in his expiring Palgs, he may
behold the Triumph, and rejoice ; and while he silds
bimfelfperi/fhi'.g with Infamy and Detefiation, let him
bve- the Pain to behold that Body he bad endeavour'd
to defle and disgrace, firvhving his AJaults with a
Fame intire and unfully'd. Ab, my Lucretia, pre-
ipi;tate Oot thb Hiitband, who loves thee above his Life,
2nto. a Wfidc-bood as terrible as detefjtd. Deprive mot
thy *sweepiig o Father of his Daughter, nor, by so vio-
lent a Fate, i.-ing not his grey reverend Head to the
Grave in a Sorrow beyond Comfort ; nor rob thy poor
Infnrts, v y teuder little Off-spring of a Guardian, osso
'ear and -.: -. l as , Mother.' Oh ! rather wis for
Life, p.r,,7g ttiy Days, to be a glad tYitnefs of the.
Revenge we will take. Reflc hut jluftly on Things, and
you have no Catife to dqJire to die. ?Tis true, the Royal
lVillain has polluted the Manfjion of tby Body, by his odious
Enjoynmert but then the Lady of this beautifull iMan-
jon is free and incomulpt, your lMid is innocent and
clear of a Guilt, you' Body c,-.'d not -.void ; and there
cma be no Crime, where there is nG Consent. Ijbo is
there fofeiTlejfs not to aciqlit thee of Guilt, when they
confidr the Circumifance ?' The Time, the Person, the
Place, btray d thee to thbs lifery; naked in thy Bed,
lTrU'd aiepllp by the Cares of the Day, when all Things but
LZ.f mad Reveigre 7ere at Repose, ,nguarded, ufll rpe. S

i'4z

s gfo black a Treachery from a Friesd, from Kinf-
.anr, and firom a King. Thus defcncelefs, umwa;ind1
undrefs'd, asleep, and ,nla, ,'d, what Refitance could'f
thou make to a young Prince, robijt in his Limbs, as
flro¢7g in his Lluf, and impetuous in bis Dejlies, ald
violently beit 0o Mulrther, or Adultery. That Ibthb,
that blooming Beauty in his Face, and Symmetry in his
Pers7on, that mIl¢/ have melted down the Virtue of all
other 'Yomen, had , o EffeS on a Bosom so rigid as
tbine. Tbe Violence be ofer'd, the welcome Excule of
the Fair, touch'd not thy iind ; and while your Body
JiTfer'd the cursed lTanfports of the youthfil Adulterer,
your Soul was as i7rfe7/ble of Pleasure, as he was of Com-
pailon or luflice. And while the T7eabiefs of your Body
submitted to the Force of his Strength, your Mlind un-
mov'd in the midfi vof the Violence of all his Caresses.
If your Soul is ambitious of a Glory mo/ peculiar, this
Triumph of ChaJlity is so great, that nothing can be
added to its Perftliotn: When in Spite of all the Al-
lurements and Frailty of weak Flefli andBlood,you
made your self a meer Statue of Marble, cold and
infeni.ble of all the Efforts of a vigorous handfoin
young Prince, full of Love, and with utmost Ea-
gernefs and Avarice satiating Iis Lr S T. Add
to this, my dear Lucretia, that you yielded not to his
Threats for the Fear of Death, but of al Infamy far
more terrible, than'Death can be to the Virtuous. The
Terror that van quijf)'d you, was the Ruine of your good
Nambe, when he Jpore not your Death only, but that of
a Slave, to be left by your brcathlefs Body, as stabb'd in
the very Adt of Adultery. Tour Father, ntay, your
4HtJlianld absolves you from all Guilt ; ah ! be not you
only a jildge .f inexorable, as to condemn your self for
a lllisfortune, which your frighted Imagination proowi-
ces as a Crime. Tis allo7'd, that we may fly Infamy by
D),zth; but by yours, you corrupt your Fame, while
witb the IFound you give your Tifom, you kill both
q:tber and Hiijbcnd. By.your Death, yui perwrt the

SSs 3 o' Y

oy of Revenge, which ca be but bhalf compleat, wrhe
it wants you for a Beholder; and by this Self-Murther
you corlupt that Innocence, and proclaim that Shame,
which our Hands wou'd expiate and ecure. If Reason
wiz't prevail, have Regard to Autbority;your Hufland,
Father, Brutus, and all your Relations, fairly ancd
fully acquit you of all Guilt, and with owe Desire forbid
your Hana the fatal Ofice it has afinm'd. Why, by
tbis Deed, will you condemn all their Judgments ? Be-
flJs, by your Death you ncu;rr the Guilt youzd avoid;
for it will be bard to p:Jfwaade, that she was innocent,
wbo thought ft to pu!q3h her self as criminal.
Lucretia's Spec:b before fieJfabb'd her self,
' ~! My dear Father ! andthou, my HufIand
c' J Colcatin! once more dear to me, than the
' Light to these Eyes, do not hinder me from put-
'ting an End to my Life, and my Miseries at
' once,! If I kill not my self, it will never be be-
' liev'd, that I was overcome not by the Fear of
' Death, but by the Fear of Infamy ? Who, if I
' live, can be so weak to believe, that the Appre-
' henfion of the odious Imputation of Adultery
' with a Slave to be six'd on my Memory for ever,
' with.which he threaten'd me, was more preva-
' lent than Death, a Fear of which my Life
' wou'd discover, but one bold Stroke with my
' Hand-wou'd remove. What a Blemish, what
' a Spot wou'd it be in my Fame, to chufe rather
'to live the AD u L T ER ES S Ltcretia, than die
' the C HA S T Lcretia ? Ah! let not your Fond-
'ness of my Person prove injurious to my good
' Name ! For do not you perceive, that you pre-
' serve me not to Life, but Infltmy; my Reputa-
' tion dying in the Life of my Person. By a Con-
' du& so fond, you confider not what you in-
' dulge to Injuries of this Nature ; the Matriimro-

' nial

nial Bed shou'd be made with Holiness; and
' by the Severity of thy Fate, the Slufibers of
' others shou'd not be broke by Suspicions and
' Jealouiles. But if by my Impunity, you open
'the Sluces to unlawful Desires, unbounded Luff
' will bear down all before it in a Torrent so
'wild, that Women will not be fatisfy'd to de-
file the Beds of their Husbands in their Ab-
' fence, but impudently, in their Arms, susser
' the Adulterer's Embraces. For what Woman is
' secure, when Lucretia is corrupted ? And you,
' my dear HuSLand, how can your Soul fall so
' low to take me to your Arms, when you shall
' remember, that they hold not your Wife, but
' the Whore of vile Tarquin ? And you, my dear
' Father, how can you vouchsafe to call Lucretia
'your Daughter, who has unhappily loft, and
' impiously corrupted that Chastity, which was
instill'd into me by the admirable Discipline of
' your House from my Childhood ? And oh! vile
' and miserable Wretch that I am, can I bear to
fee my Children look with their innocent Eyes
' upon me, when the chaf Womb that bore them
' has been infamously polluted by an Adulterer ?
Shou'd my passive Body be pregnant by the
' purple Villain, wou'd you have me live to bring
' forth the Fruit of Adultery ? Place not before
my Eyes the Splendor of my palu Life, in which
' if any Thing just and honourable appear, one
' Night, one fatal Night has fully'd all, when I
admitted a mortal Foe, in the Disguise of a
'Friend to my House. My Life is no longer
pleasing to me, 'tis odious, 'tis a Burthen, an
' insufferable Weight, whlch I cannot bear, when
I find that my Zeal for Chastity alone was the
Cause of my Ruin: Yes, yes the accursed Adul-
6 terer was not so fond of trampling on my
( Beauty, as my ChafJity that was the Trophy

F f 4 he

87

he long'd for. If this has been the Reward, this
'the Fruit of my Continence, what must I es.

pe& of my Rape and Adultery? But scandalous
' Prostitution in the publick Brothels ? Alas! a-
' alas! my Mind pure and uncorrupted, cannot
' endure the Company of my Body foul and cor-
' rupted! Whether the Laws cf the Body are
subjet to the MRind, or not, I can't tell; but I
'am afraid the Soul has not Power enough to
' flop the Motions of Nature, and render the Bo-

dy infeniible, as the Mind. If this corporeal
' Frailty have, in spite of all the Aversion of my
' Mind, been compell'd to a Sensibility of any

such odious and deteftablePleafure, oh! Father!
' oh ! Husband, forgive me, and susser that Part,
' which has been any way criminal, to expiate
' the Guilt by this Dagger. Had you the true
' Romna; Spirit in you, you ihou'd be so far from
hind'ring my Execution, as to puniih the Of-
'fender your selves. No, no, I will not have
' the Image of these Evils perpetually before your

Eyes, and be a cnftant Aleineto of my Disgrace
'and my Guilt. Woman is accus'd of Inconflan-
' cy of Temper; and Time, that may aflwage
" this Anguiih and Pallion, may raise others

more dangerous and criminal. Shou'd I defer
' the Punishment, perhaps the Crime might please.
' Let me go, let me go : Give me leave to pierce

this Bosom with my Dagger, where that vio-
' lent Spoiler of my Honour gave me the first
' Alarm to Luff, by prefing with his trembling
' Fiugers those Breasts, that panted with Rage and
'Despair. Move me not to Pity; for if I spare
' my Life, I spare ar Adnlterefs, if I spare an
' MAdite-efs, I spare .4dltery it self and ifI cou'd

once be brought to spare AduZltey, Adultery wou'd
' thln be agreable, and if so, then the Adulterer
'himiflf. Wickedness once begun, never itops

' where

' where it does begin, but goes on in a fatal
Progression, 'till it arrive at its Stygian Perse-
' tion. I have no Way of Ease; and being with-
' out Witness of the Faa, I have no Way to gain
'Credit to my Assertions, but by fealing their
Truth with my Blood. That, my Soul, shall
'be my Evidence, at the dreadful Tribunal of
' Mios and Acberon: That shall accuse the Roy-
al Ravilher of the Violation of my Honour,
and the Pollution of my Body. And you, my
'Earthly Body, because you have brought forth
'the Cause of Adultery, betray'd thy self by thy.
' Charms to the Embraces of the Tyrant, dif-
' charge my struggling Soul; pour out thy Blood
'in Expiation ! that it may be a happy Omen
' to the speedy DeffruEtion of the cruel proud Fa-
' ter, and ill-fated Son. And you my Husband,
once most dear to me, and you my reverend
Father! whose tender Eye and once chearing
' Presence, my Shame and my Misfortune make
'me willingly fly, and all you my Friends fare-
' well! Lucretia shall never be brought as an infa-
'mous Example to any Roman Lady, that Infa-
' my and.Life cou'd in her subsist together.

With that she plung'd the Dagger into her
snowy Bosom, and only had Life left to fay,
Revenge the injur'd Lucretia : Which'was done by
the Expulsion of Tarquin, and all his Race.

The End of /Eneas Sylviu.s's Lct;er~

LETS

9c
LETTERS to Gentlemen and

Ladies.
To Mrs. Elizabeth Handy, my Lady --

Gentlewoman.
Dear Betty,
INCE you have promis'd to cnjider me for
3 drawing your Picture, and to bejrtier than
your Mistress, who has not as yet paid me a Far-
thing for drawing hers, and a thousand other Ser-
vicesI have done her in my Time; I am willing
to gratify your Desire, and paint you with all the
little A-t I am Master of. At the fame Time I
may without Vanity affirm, that your Picture
will be a triter and more finijifed Piece than hers,
since you don't expec I should flatter you; for
which Reason you muff not take it ill of me, if I
tell you, without farther Ceremony, that you are
not ba.dfom. Should I use this Freedom with your
Mliftrefs, tho' I have the Trith never. so much on
my Side. she wou'd call me all the vile Names un-
der the Sun; but I know I am talking to you,
whom I fear less than her, by the fame Token I
love you a great deal better.

Once more then I mufft tell thee, my dearefi
Betty, that thou art not bansdfom; but then I defy
the Devil himself to fay, thou art deform'd. No,
no, my dear Child, thou haft a smiling roguy
Air, and a certain Je nefcay qlioy, which our fie71

Ladies
_ ·
_· _

Ladies are often without, and sets all the Springs
of Nature in Motion, as often as I think on't. Thy
CoYnplexion is brown, and none of the clearefl.
Thy Eye-brows are as black as a Coal, and, by
the Afliftance of A-t, wonderfully becoming. Thy
i1\,f is a little tin'd up; which is an infallible
Sig1, dear Rogue, that thou art a Lover of the
jiatbelmaticts. Thy Moutb is somewhat of the lar-
gef ; but then, to make thee. Amends, 'tis so pro-
per for a Man's Tongue to wanton in : Then thy
Teeth are as regular, as the Palisade before thy
Lady's Parlour, and as wbite as, Ivory. Thou
haft the dainties finacking Lips in the .Universe,
that wou'd invite a Hermit to fgn and feal upon
them. Thy Hair, which reaches down to thy
Ilafle, and is of a kvely Black, gives no little AM-
dition to thy other Charms- As for thy Bubbies,
dear Child, they are none of the whitest, but they
are plump and fleflly, and rife andfall so prettily,
that I am fiark mad to have the' prefing of them:
Were Bubbies to be bought and fold for unigodly
Pes, thou might'ft safely boaif, that thou art
Richer than thy Lady. As for thy Shape, I may
veznture to fay without Flattery, 'tis fine and de-
licate. Thy Legs are so firaight and well-pro-
portion'd, and thy Feet fleal in and out so prettily
under thy Petticoats, that I long to be better ac-
qgainted with them. If thou had'st defign'd I
ihould have painted thy other Parts, thou ough-
test to have (hewn them me, for between Friends,
thou ihould conceal nothing from us Painters; and
I don't question but that thy'Picture would have
been ten Times more compleat, had I drawn thee
faerk baked. However, I have seen enough to con-
vince me, that thou art a moll delicious Morsel of
Iniquity ; and, unless the Planets deceive me, I
dare swear thy Inclinations are not averse to the
F/l.'. Thus, my dear Child, I have drawn part

of

of thy: Picture, by which a Man, that has but
once had a Sight of thee, may easily know thee a-
gain: But now I am preparing to Ihew thee some
of my Master-strokes, tQ satisfy thee I am no
Buglkr at my Trade, but can tell how to draw
People after the Life. Not to make thee vain, Na.
ture has been wonderful indulgert to thee S thou
can'st set of thy Person with a little Expence, and
appear in an ordinary Stuff more advalntageozrjl,
than any of our fliff-rump'd Countetfes in their
Silks and Sattins.- In the Point of Drefing, thy
Fancy is the most Orthodox in the World: Envy it
self cou'd never charge thee with putting one Pin
out of its due Place; nay, even thy very Negli-
gence has Charms, and becomes thee. As for thy
pretty little Fingers, nothing in Nature comes a-
miss to them, they are pe.fecly fkill'd in all the
Mysteries of Embroidery, they can flitch and fjr,
cut Birds and BeaJts, and the whole History of the
Creation in Paper, raise Fortifications in Pal1e, and
a'thoufand other Curiojities. Thou hall more lit,
than wou'd set up a dozen Waiting-Gentle'women,
and can'st jee as far into a Miill-fJone, as the oldeJ
Match-maker in Town : Thou can'st discover a
a hundred Things, which no Body else wou'd have
taken any Notice of; nay, I have obferv'd more
than once, that thou knowe.t the Intention of Peo-
ple, let them take never so much Care to conced,
it. I'll defy all the'waiting Women in the Uni-
verse to shew so much MeekneJs of Spirit, as thou
dolt, or so virtu-it s a Disposition to bring an h-
t;-igne to a bappy Conclusion. 'Tis true indeed,that
in Relation to thy wicked Lady, this Talent of
thine has hitherto been ififccejsfil.; but if thou
continuelt much lrger about her Person, I don't
doubt but some of thy tratagem.s will take Effet.
Thou halt an amiozu Inclination, as I hinted to
-hee above; ard I am damnably miftakn, it thou

cal'tf

can'st live a Day, without engaging in some wew.
Amour: But then, Child, thy Love is noble, 'tis
built upon no Sordid Principles of Lucre; it pro-
poses nothing to it self, but the Ease and Relief of
Mankind, and always foa's above thy Condition.
But let thy' Lovers be of what anality they will,
thou know's how to make them observe their due
Dillnce, and govern 'em like a true Mistress. Thou
haft Dexterity enough to manage a laudable Com-
merce with five or Jix Gallants at once; for, to
thy eternal Praise be it said, ne'er a Woman in the
World is deeper read in all the Refinements of Gal-
lantry, than thy fell. Thou know'ft how to be-
stow thy Favours with Dijcretion, to employ some-
times Cormpafion, and sometimes Disdain; to aSt
the Fond and the Indifferent, according as the va-
riots Disposition of the Scene requires it; in flhort,
to make a proper Use of thy Looks and Sighs. Thou
can'st dart a favourable Glance at one, while thou
fqteezefl the other by the Hand; and talk tender-
ly to a third, while thou tread'Jt upon the Toes of
thefourth ; and manages Affairs so discreetly, as
to make none of them deSpair: Not that thou art
so willing a Tit neither, as to let every Blockhead
getup and ride for asking: Faith, Child, I'll swy
that for thee, thou waft always a RefpeRer of Me-
rit, and wou'dft vouchsafe thy Friendjbip to none
but those that deferv'd it. If any young Fellow
falls roughly upon thee, in one of his amorous Fits,
thou know's how to humble his Insolence, without
tearing his Ruffles, or playing the Fury with his
Hair. Should thy Mistress furprize thee confer-
ring Notes with a Friend in a Corner, or in a Po-
flire, that wou'd give Offence in another, thou art
not a Jot difconipos'd for the Matter; but know'ft
so well how to personate the Innocent, that 'tis
inpoJiible to find the least Cause of quarrelling with
thee. Upon all such OcaJliols, thou haft a thou-

sand

sand Excrtes ready cut and dry'd for the Purpose.
and thy Wit never displays it self so signally, as
in there Re;,coiunters, which wou'd utterly dn;.
found a Person of less Aluirance. Besides, Betty, to
give thee thy Due, thy Soul is neither inseted
with fe.zloufy nor Envy ; thou art no Enemy to the
Divertifements of others, but takeft as much D.-
light to procure, as to receive them thy self, and
art never in thy Kingdom, but when thou art
bolding the Door. When thou fee'lt two Lovers
under any unbappy Circumilances, thou know't'
how to injinuate thy self into their Confidence with
.ddrefs, and art ravifled to find any Opportunity
to contribute to their Pleafitres. After all, thou
art generous to a Miracle, and not at all influenc'd
by literef ; thou preferr'ft an honest Fellow's
hearty Affeion, to the PlFfe of a wealthy Cox.
comb and did'ft never in all thy Life foop so low,
as to value that glittering TraJ, call'd Money.
Nay, Child, I dare engage for thee, that did thy
Abilities come up to thy TIill, thou wou'dft give
infiead of taking the Pence, and allow those that
had a Share in thy Afelions, a noble Share of thy
Fortune. And, Betty, Itis this virtuous rinlciple,
that makes thy Lovers flick so close to thee: As
thou art infinitely more generous and witty, thali
all the Servant-maids in Chrifteom7 put together, so
one may justly conclude, that thou haft none of
their Vices or Imperfedions. Thou dost not trol-
bl thy Head to find out, and afterwards proclaiir
the Faults of thy Mistress; thou raifeft no idle
Squabbles about the Wages or Gettings of thy Fel-
low-fervants; and as 'tis thy chief Desire to co.'
veJfe with People Face to Face, thou canfl not en-
dure to speak ill of them behind their Backs: So
much for thy Miorals. Now to give forme Speci-
men of thy intellelrual Parts, thou cailf nicely di-
ftinguifl between filfoinm Love, and Love drefs'd

up

up in clean Metaphors, and haft informnd thy Judg-
ment, by reading Romances and other good Books,
that talk feelingly and jidicioz/fly of these Affairs.
'Tis true, that so many fIining Qualities make
thee as much envy'd by the Maids and Footmen,
as thou art admir'd by the Masters and Miftrefies.
In Ihort, my dear Child, thou art the Heroine of
Waiting-women, and Glory of thy Funtion; and
I make not the leafI Queltion, but that one of there
Davs we ihall all of us fee some notable Adventure
befal thee, that will convince the World, that thou
waft descended of illuJrious Parentage.
Thus, my charming Betty, I have endeavour'd
to draw your Piture, which, I hope, will give
you such Satisfafion, that you won't grudge to
pay me for't in the fame Coin as. you promis'd me,
who am

Tour most humble Admirer.
Upon a Harlot in St. James's, that hang'd her

self, for an Irish Captain, and zas unluckily
cut down by her . iaid.
AN old Acquaintance of mine came to my

Lodgings this Morning,, and accosted me
after this Manner. Harry, cries he, there's the
firangeft Accident has happen'd yonder, near
Covent-Garden, that ever you heard, and prithee,
try if you can guess it. Why, fays I to him, I
have no extraordinary Hand at this Sport; but
if'tis so very strange, and the Scene near.Covent-
Garden, as you fay, let me fee: Has the talking
Parrot in Ruf!el-fireet foretold the Downfall of the
French King ? No. Now I talk of a Parrot.; when
Doctor Bzlgefs preach'd last, did he make no Bo-

dy

dy laugh ? XAo. A Whore proffer'd a retaiing
Fee at Rouse's, and deny'd it? No. A City-Re.
former furpriz'd between a Pair of red-hair'd
Strumpets, at the Horfe-Jfoe ? No. A new Play
talk'd of at Trill's, and no Exceptions made to it?
iNo Sir. Thus No was the Word fill. At last
fays my Friend, in his old leering Way, to put
you out of your Pain, a certain Harlot in
St. 3James's- has run away from her Lodgings,
carry'd off all her Effects in her Pocket-Handker.
chief, I suppose, and - Why, is that so strange
NAo, no, but hear me with Reverence and Atten.
tion, - decently suspended her self Yesterday
Morning, between the Hours of Twelve and One.
precisely, - the true Canonical Hour for hanging.
Says I to him, as I hope to be fav'd, but, prithee
lack, for what-- Why, what shou'd she hang
her self for but Love, said he, very. gravely -
The Devil the did, fays I again: Thou may's as
well tell me, a Foot-Soldier wou'd die a Martyr
for Small-beer, a true States-man for his Coun-
try's Interest, or a City-Apprentice for Slfolk
Cheese - Why, truly, Sir, you may make
merry as long as you please, fays he, but 'tis e-
ven so as I tell you, and her Name - Why,
that is what I long to know - Don't interrupt
me then, 'tis the famous Mrs. C- Well, Peace
light on her Soul, 'twas gloriotjly done - But
you have not heard all, fays he. She had not
hung a full Minute, when, alas, to fee the great
Uncertainty of human Affairs! her Maid, the
Duce take me, if my very Heart did not leap up
to my very Mouth at the bare mention of her
Name, hearing a Noise above, run up Stairs, and
unluckily cut her down; and a Chirurgeon, with
a Pox to him, made a Shift to bring her to her
self, and recover'd her. And thus, continu'd he,
Shaking his Head in a sorrowsid Manner, they

have

have between 'em fpoil'd one of the bell Jells in
Cbritlendom.

This is the exas Relation riy Friend gave me
of this ffaair. Now to do thee Jalic e, thou art
theonly Harlot since the Creation, I believe. that
ever had it put into her Head by the Devil, to
fall a Sacrifice to Love, Who cou'd have imagin'd,
that a Womani of thy free commitnicatite Spirit,
thou'd fix her Affedion, which was distributed be-
fore to all Mankind in common, to Jews as well as
Gentiles, upon one transitory Mortal, nay, love
him to that Degree, as to veizture Fire and Brim-
lone for his Sake. This is so monifrozis and fur-
prizing, that I much fear me, my dear Child, it
portends some unlucky Revolution to Europe, the
Downfall of the Protestant Religion in the Palati-
tate, the Universal Monarchy of France, the un-
kinging of his Poliij MaWiefty, or the beating of
Prince Eugete out of Italy. Had'fl thou admini-
ftred a little Neapolitan Consolation to thy Hiber-
idian for his Infidelity, thou had's reveng'd thy self
upon him in thy own Way and Profegon; but to
hang thy self for a faitblefs Wretch, was so wrong
a Step in Politicks, that I can't imagine how thou
could'st fall upon it! Alas, thy BuJminefs is living,
and ndt dying ; or, if thou mufl needs resolve up-
on the latter, thou oughteft to die in thy own
Element, I mean, of Love's afive Distemper+ and
even of that, no where under a Garret. Money is
a Whore's Religion, Love is downright Superfti-
tion: Now, why should one of thy Fun&ion, ::
this Atbeiftical Age too, die for an Error,; ;Lrn
our very Parsons won't do it for the Trutb.
But, my Dear, I only fay this by Way of Rail-
lery, for, between Friends, I so heartily approve
of thy virtuous Resolution, that I am almost rea-
dy to hang my self for its Miscarriage.

Gg

Bless

Bless me! what wou'd I have given to have been
in thy Chamber, when this glorious Scene was
transacting there 3 but, Heaven be prais'd, I have
a tolerable good Fancy of my own, with whose
Affifrance I can make a Shift to guess pretty well
how it was. I imagine then, I fee thee taking
some half a Score melancholy Turns about thy
Room, writh a noble Diftration, and beroick Wild.
ness in thy Looks, like Queen Dido a little before
she ascended the Funeral Pile. Methinks I hear
thee pouring out a Volly of hearty Ejaculations a.
gainifthy sale Gallant,--then down with thy
Looking-glafs, - then out with the Cords,-
then salten them to the Staple, -,-- then mount
the fatal joint-Stool, -- then take the fatal Leap,
ha, ha, ha, it makes me ready to die with the
Conceit,- and then swing

TWith anlr Ai and a Face,
And a Slhape, and a Grace,
As the Song has it, like a School-boy in a Bell-
rope, but so prettily and decently, that I must
needs fry for thee, with the Knot so nicely plac'd
under thy right Eaf,-thy Mouth so merrily diftor.
ted, and the Humidity of thy Nature so plentcorfly
fireaming down upon the Floor, that, for my
Part, I wou'd rather have beheld this Sight, than
any of the Roman Triumphs, and sooner seen thee
dangling undler the Rope, than a thousand Lady
-'-; "'. showing their Agility upon it.
Taith, my dear Child, to beferious with thee,
I wou'd not have had thee cut down for a Alilliolt,
and a Million, thou know'ft, is a pretty rolnd
Sum, as Times go. In the first Place, had thy
noble D.fign taken Effet, thou would'st have beep
immortaliz'd iii all the News-Papers about Town,
and thy P)yz molt curiously engrav'd in Wood

by

by honest John Overton, to adorn tle Walls of eve-
ry Coffee-house in Drury-lane. The poor Sfter-
hood of Yild-Jfreet wou'd have quoted thy Name
with as much Veneration, as the Boys in Cheapfide
talk of the London Apprentice, that kill'd his Brace
of Lions, and kept the Anniversary (.f thy Sutren-
so1 more religiouRfy than the good People or lHhite
friars do that of their Martyr, Captain tfinter.
Then there wou'd have been halfa Score mournful
Odes made upon thee, that's certain, sung moit
harmoniously at Holbourin-bars and Fleet-ditch: The
Ballad-Women wou'd have cry'd, Here's a newn and
true Ballad of a Miss of the Town, that hbag'd her jelf
ingreat Queen-ftreet. Then some of the Standers
by woudd have ask'd, For what ? For what ? W hy,
because the had, perhaps, cries one of them, been
over-work'd in Bridewell; or because she had fall'n
into the Hands of' Justice Perry, cries another; or
was stripp'd of her only Petticoat, by an aunerci-
fill Drawer, fays a, third; or an unkind Spark
gave her a small Token of his Affeaion, cries a
fourth, and left her not a Farthing ta. get rid on't.
Thus the Mob wou'd have bandied their Opinions
about thee, and, at last, the Ballad-Women clear'd
all, by telling them, In Truth, you are niftaken, Jfe
hang'd her self for Love. Upon this, there wou'd
have been such lIouting and clapping of Hands,
such holloving and huzzaing, that the whole Town
wou'd have. run with the Noise. Nay, who
knows but the. City-Poet, 'in a-sew Years, wou'd
have brought thee into Smithfield, where thou
would'st soon have o'er-topp'd .rfphtha's Daugh-
ter, and Baseman's Ghost ?. Or lalily, who can
tell, but thou mighte.ft have been preferr'd to the
Almanack, and a new .ra commenc'd from thy
glorious Srifpetifon ? Well, it makes me stark mad,
my dear Cteature, to think, that thou haft loft
all these Advantages and Honours, these Tro-

Gg 2 phies

phies and Epitaphs, through the over-officious
Folly of thy Maid. Prithee, let me conjire thee
to turn her away for my Sake, or rather for thy
ow , for why flould thou keep a filly Slut in thy
Service, that has robb'd thee of Immortality ?

T. Brotn.
To Mr. B -- in Covent-Garden.
An Account of a Journey to Exon.

April 8. 170o.
A S we have one good Quality in our Sex be-
.t1 yond what yoos can boast of, that is, fel.
dom to make a Promise, but with a Design to
keep it; I have therefore been careful to let you
fee I cannot earily forget any Thing, which so
great an Obligation as my TSord hath engag'd me
to remember: And as there was nothing needful,
but a bare Remembrance of my Promise to induce
me to preserve it; so I hope, on your Part, there
will be nothing more requir'd to render what I
have sent you acceptable, than a Willingness to
receive it. I confess I have given you but a rude
Account of my _Journey, every Part just fcribled
o'er with as much Freedom as 'twas aded, want-
ing Leisure to put it in any other than a loose
.i1rning-drefs; not questioning, but it may please
you as well without the Formalities of Stile, as a
pretty IWoman without Stays may some of your Ac-
quaizntane.

In the sirs Place, I mall give you a rough
Draught of those dijcording Mortals our Compan was
compos'd of in the Stage-Coach, (viz.) A Barrifier

at Law, an Attorny's Clerk, a CorniJb i,/lice, a Tay-
lor, and a Valet to a Parliament-man that would be;
but some Dispute ariing in the Eletion, prevents
me fixing his Title: That had I been travelling in
a Dutch Scout, or a Gravesend Tilt-boat, I could not
have been treated with less Manners, or teaz'd
with more Impertinence.

The 5rztfice, notwithstanding the Goverment's
Care for the Reformation of Vice, was as drunk as
a Dutch Captain before he engages, and; for the
first Day, talk'd of nothing but Fox-hounds, March-
beer, Warrants, IYhipping-pofls and Vagabonds, hal-
lowing as laudably in every Interval of his Non-
fence, as if he had been riding three-quarter-fpeed
at the very Heels of his Beagles, larding his other
iualifcations now and then with a Scrap of an old
Hunting-Sonlg, with a Hey down, ho down, O'c. which
gave me goad Reason to fufpet he had been much
more conversant with Robin Hood's Balads, than
with Keeble's Statutes, understanding the latter, I
believe, as much. as a German Tugler does Necro-
mancy, or a Lord-Mayor State-Policy.

The Limbs of the Law were much difturb'd at his
Bawling, for I conceive they love no Bodies Noi7e but
their own. They defir'( him to sleep ; but he
cry'd, 'Zounds, I wit't sleep; I din't care a F-t for
yor Anger, I'm 'a rJftice of Peace, 'id worth thirty
tboufand Pound, and am the Head-Man where I live;
and, by G-d, if you come to LanEthon, I'll give you
a Gla;js f the bel Mar:c-Beer you ever drank in your
Life: But I will make a ANoii, if I pleafc. I was in
Hopes of feeing Law and iufrice fall together by
the Ears; but at last Jruflce slept, and the Law
got the better by surviving it.

The Taylor, had you seen him, you wou'd have
sworn he had been broke by the .fubilee Beaux, for
he had the Lines of Faith in his Face, and his
Cloths bore the Marlks of Poverty he complain'd

G g 3 very

verY much of Tnifling: I find 'tis a common Ca.
lanit ,. and ruins more Families, than the Royal
Oa1-Lotre: y.

The t!'et personated his Master to a Tittle,
and wvas as arrogant and noisy, as e'er a Conltry
'Sqg:i; e in Eiglaid

No.v, it I were to be hang'd, I can't tell who
had most Manners of all these: The Lawyer slept
Dogs sleep molt Part of the Way, I suppose the
better to ruminate on the Causes he had in Hand.
The Clei k was as impertinent as a Midwife at a
G6 ppbig, and I as dull as an old WYonma at
a Ftr;e;il. They fail'd not to eat and drink
heartily upon the Road, nor to make me club to
the Reckoning; 3-, ufice and Law were both of a
Side in that Particular and the Court of Eqlity
being very chargeable, I chose to submit upon any
Terms% rather than seek for Remedy.

After the Fatigue of four Days, which might
serve for a reasonable Penance foi all the Sins I
ever committed in my Life, I arriv'd at Exon,
where we met the Jfudges entering the Town in as
much Triumph, as ever Cafar did Rome after a
Victory the High-Sbvrrif rode in as miuch State,
as a Colonel of the City Train-bands, and much in
the fame Order, only the Sberifi march'd in the
Rear of liis Army, and the other in the Front.
The next Day being SInday, call'd by the Natives
of this Country iALzc-Simday, ( and indeed not
without some Reason, for the People look'd as if
they were gillicd) I was ak'd' by the tremen-
dous Sound of a Hofe-Trzumpet; I imagin'd tome
Mojiflr was to Le seen, and, looking out of my
Wr'indow, I saw several Sorts; the sirs were
Mi-s. Sheriff and her H.Zsb7;d, (for Women rule in
this Climate, and therefore I give her the Prehe-
minence) in a triumphant Chariot (erected on
Purpose for that Occafon) with Dick and Doll

cro'wding

crowding to fee their 7Jlor/hips, as if it had been
his CzariJ1l Majcfly: The Cuftorm, it feenis, is to
conduct them in this Manner to the most magni-
ficent Church of the Place, where we will leave
them to their several Ejaculations.

I am your oblig'd Servant,

Tol know who.
The AnBfwer. By Mr. Brown.
Mada7m, Apl zz. 1700
Receiv'd your Letter, and am glad to find by
it, that you have got that'by making a finall
%Jorncey to Exeter, for which other People are forc'd
to cross the Alpes, and beat the Hoof to Rome, I
mean the Remijiicn of your Sins, which you think
you have made a reafonab]e Atonement for, by
suffering so much from the Impertinence of the
Cornii J uftice, and the two Limbs of the Law.

But, Madam, don't flatter your ielf, or think,
that your Chalk will be so easily wiped out. You
have been a great Sinner in your Time, and Joew
Days Penance in a Stage-Coacb will hardly atone for
the Sins you have committed: And, because we
are too apt to be over-favourable to our selves,
give me Leave, Madam, to awaken your C0offci-
ence out of this dangerous State of Security, by lay-
ing before you some of the many Sins you are
accountable for.

Imprimis, Here are People in Town, that charge
you with Murders numberless; and, unless you
heartily repent of them, and promise to commit no
snore, I find but little Hopes of you. Yes, )Aadam,
you are charg'd With Murder, with this horrid Ag-

G g 4. gravatioN

-.-;'ation too on your Side, That whereas other
- rI ':rs only murder their Enemies, or such as
.t ii!.!P_ to be so, you make no Scnple to kill
* oar L rs. that throw themselves at your Feet,
and .-:ou d purchase a single Smile from you at a
fovrt l5ear's S7nice.

In the n xt Place, you are accus'd of Theft. Set
your H-;il to your Heart, Aiadanm, and do but
colfsider how many of those valuable Commodities
you have stolen in your Time, yet never had the
Conscience to restore them to the right Owners.
What makes the Crime worse in you, you have
added Sacrilege to Tbeft, and fiol away People's
Hearts at Church, in the Time of Divine Service,
and in the Sigbt of Mofis and Aaron.

You'll tell me, perhaps, that this is no Thejt;
and that if MIen will put their Hearts upon you,
how can you help it ? But, gMadarm, some People
gave them you, who had no Right to dispose of
them,as I cou'd inflance in a thousand married Mien
thatj.gb'd for you; and, according to the ancient
Proverb, the Receiver is as bad as the Tbief, for they
frJle 'em from their lYives to bestow 'em upon you.

17ir-dly and bliy, SMadam, you have not only
your own Sins, but those of other People to. an-
fwer for. How many Tlomen have you made
guilty of the ho'rid Sin of Detra2ion, and tell a
thousand malicious Stories of you, only because you
were bandfomer than they ? How many Men have
you made guilty of Perjury; and tempted them to
forsake their former Vows, to fac;iifce 'em to you ?

' hus, Madinn, I have made bold to lay some of
your Sins before you. Should I undertake to fend
you a full Catalogue ofthem, I shou'd have as fine
a Time on't, as the Commnicrners, that are to infpec
publick Accounts. Therefore never think, that
your Ereter-Jiurney has compounded for them. I
Vwol'd advise you this boy Tear of Jubilee, to turn

your

Beams, whereas the Sun in Africk does not fcorcb
nore violently. Your Cheeks are adorn'd with so
ldeicious a Red, that half the World imagines you
are painted, whereas you wholly owe it to the In-
dulgence of Nature., And lastly, as for your Con-
verfation, nothing is so easy and free, yet no-
thing seems so artificial and studied.

On the other Hand, Madam, your humble
Servant is perfectly the Reverse of what he appears
to be. You'd take him for a wavering inconfiant
Fellow, and so does the Generality of your Sex,
that regulate their -udgnment of him by Appearan-
ces ; but, to my certain Knowledge, he's the fin
erefi Lover upon Earth. 'Tis true, he seems to
proffer his Heart to a thousand other Women;
yet, take my Word for't, he only designs it for
you: If Sometimes he ads the Indifferent, and
tells you, he cares not a Farthing for you, don't
believe him ; for then his Passion is at the highest,
and he could readily die for you.

Thus, Madam, 'tis plain we are both of us
Hypocrites, tho' of a different Species. What will
you fay to my Proposal then of bringing both our
Noble Qualifications into one common Stock ?
For, perhaps, something very sincere may be the
Result of it.

To

Beams, whereas the Sun in Africk does not fcorcb
more violently. Your Cheeks are adorn'd with so
delicious a Red, that half the World imagines you
are painted, whereas you wholly owe it to the In-
dulgence of Nature. And laitly, as for your Con-
verfation, nothing is so easy and free, yet no-
thing seems so artificial and studied.

On the other Hand, Madam, your humble
Servant is perfedly the Reverse of what he appears
to be. You'd take him for a wavering inconflant
Fellow, and so does the Generality of your Sex,
that regulate their Judgnment of him by Appearan-
ces i but, to my certain Knowledge, he's thefi-.
ceres Lover upon Earth. 'Tis true, he seems to
proffer his Heart to a thousand other Women;
yet, take my Word for't, he only designs it for
you: If sometimes he ass the Indiffeent, and
tells you, he cares not a Farthing for you, don't
believe him; for then his Passion is at the highefi,
and he could readily die for you.

Thus, Madam, 'tis plain we are both of us
Hypocrites, tho' of a different Species. What will
you fay to my Proposal then of bringing both our
Noble Qualifications into one common Stock ?
For, perhaps, something very Jincere may be the
Result of it.

To

To Madam de B--
Upon her being angry with im for telling her,

that his Sozulhad left him to go and inhabit
with her.
F OR Heaven's Sake, Madam, what have. I

done to you to put you into so cruel a Pas.
sion ? Was it then so uiapardonable a Crime in me,
to tell your Ladyflhip, that my Soul had quitted
its old Tenement to take up its Quarters with you?
For my Part, I cannot fee wherein it fliould so
mightily dzfIleafe you. If you believe nothing of
the Matter, why then should you be so offended
at it ? And if 'tis true, that this Vagabond of a
Soul has left me for you, ttake it to your flfa
God's Name, and don't fend it back to its old
Matter, that has now no Title to it: For ever since
the Frolick has taken it to loiter about you, it
comes so seldom Home, that I have no Time to
pr;ijfh it for deserting me. Perhaps you may think
this -Adventure without Example 5 but, I can as-
sure you, 'tis not so new, as your Ladyship ima-
gines. If ever you had read Pliny, he wou'd have
inform'd you, that the Soul of one, Hermotimts
us'd to abdicate his Body, as often as the TIhimfey
took it, in Order to divert it self more agreeably
eiieIwere, as it fawv Occasion; and thenwhen the
Frolick was spent, wou'd come home civilly to its
old Habitation, and tell Henrmotimi what fine
Things it had obferv'd abroad. This was a won-
derPfl pretty Way of traveling, for one to run o-
ver the Lord knows how many Leagtes, without
the least Fatigue, or being Fxpos'd to any of those
nwoniven.enices, that use to incommode other Tra-
vellers. But Madam, there's a sensible Difference

in

in the Cafe between Hermotimus and me: For that
worthy Gentleman's Body, all the while his Soul
was absent from it, lay as cold and imnnoveable as
a Stone but, for my Part, I eat, and drink, and
dance, and laugh, while my Soul is taken up near
your Person. By this, Madam, you may fee,
that you have wrought a Miracle upon me, much
more coni'derable than any in Pliny tho, under
the Rose, that ingenious Roman was no Niggard
of his Prodigies, when once his Hand was in. I
am

Tour, &c.
To Madam
To acquaint her, that he had the good Fortune

to escape a double Scowing, viz. Death and
Marriage.
SINCE I have been depriv'd of the Happiiefs

of feeing you, I had like to have done two of
the foolilJheJ Things, which a Man in his fober
Serifes can possibly be guilty of, if 'tis in his Power
to avoid them; I mean, Madam, I had like to
have gone the Way of all Fleff, in a mortal and
matrimonial Sense; or, in plainer EngligD, either
to have been interr'd in a Church-yard, or undone
at the Church-Altar. To set me right in your
good Opinion, 'tis but convenient I ihould in-
form you, Madam, that neither of these was of
my own seeking; but that a burning Fever threa-
ten'd to fend me, nolens volens, to the Grave, and
my good-natur'd Parents to condemn me to a
Yife. However, Heaven be praised, I have made
a Shift to avoid both those Ble4ings and since

you

you have been always pleas'd to express fomeCoit.
cern for my Welfare, I am vain enough to believe
'twill be some Satisfadion to you to learn hol I
efcap'd them.

My Fever had brought me to a very /or Con.
dition, so that I expe7led every Moment when I
should take a Leap in the Dark; for which Rea.
son I was willing to clear my Debts before I par-
ted, and if I had stolen any Thing from anr of
my Neighbours, honestly to restore it, that I might
not be embarrafs'd in my Journey to' the other
World. Immediately I remember'd, that I had
read in some of our Casuists, (perhaps it was
St. AuIii, but I won't be positive) that to fleal
was nothing else but to take away something, that
belong'd to our Neighbour, without his ConfJent:
Upon which Account' remembring, that I had
fiolen certain valuable Goods from your pretty
Cousin Belinda without her Leave, my poor Co7-
fcielce flew 'in my Face, and acted the Part of a
Fury. This Consideration, in ihort, so terribly
allarm'd me, that'tis impoifible to tell you what
Agomnes I lay under; so that being fully refolv'd
to make Reftitntion of all that very Moment, I
ask'd my Confeflor, a grave ancient Pillar of the
Church, whether he wou'd give himself the Trou-
ble to take into his Custody a few Things I had
foleh from a certain Person, and deliver them to
their proper Owner. The old Gentleman, over-
joy'd to find so pious a Disposition in me, made
Anfiwer, that he wou'd do it with all his Heart.
Upon this I gave him a little Plare, which I wore
about my Neck in Nature of a Relick-Cafe, where-
in he found a Lady's Picture in Miniature, three
red Ribbons, and a Locket of Hair. When my
venerable Spark saw this, Come, come, cries he, if
you have been guilty rs no other Theft, ne'er trouble
yor Jfelf about the A1atter: This is a Peccadillo, a

mler

ieer Trife, and ,ny Life for yours, will ?Iezver r, ine
j'fdgment againjt you. Aye, but Father, said I to
him, this is n7othing to bhat fo!llos, for I have foie
fometh}inig of a thousand Times greater talue than
tlis. How, nmy dear Cbild, said he, twirling up
his Whiskers most judiciously, ancd what can that
Ib? Tis, anfwer'd I, what both the Indies cannot
pmrcbafe 'tis what would pay the greatest Mac-
,arcb's Ranfomr upon' Earth, and I mits beg yoe
to rejiore it with the other Thi7;gs, That you may

fire of, young a71an, reply'd our Scruple-drawer,
for what fays one of the brightest Luminariies of the
Ltilt C/urch ? Noit tollitur' peccatum 7lij[ refltiuatiur
ablaitlrn: Which, for your Ladyhip's Edificationi
i thus translate:

Ifyou ref ore eiot what you fiole,
0I N.ic]k 'iil buli7nyozi to a Coal.
With that, in fpight of my Weakness, I jumpi'
out of Bed,took old Ecclei/afiicus by the Beard, and
gave him ten or a dozen hearty BulOes, and defir'd
him to refjore them to your Cousin Belinda. Al°
sho' my, Rela'tibns;, that flood round my Bed,
were in Tears to fee me' so near my Iaft Exir, yet
they could not forbear laughing at so rididclous a,
Scene; nay, even the good Father himself loft all'
his Gravity, to -find me troubled wvith so' mervry a
Remorse of Coffcience. However, to- corhpofe
my afflied Spirit, lie pi6rmis'd, in Verbo Sacerdo-
tis, that both the Pife and the Ifes fhduld be
faithfully' refor'd to their right Oiwnci'. When
tiey had given me Saiisfa7ioni in this importanz
Point, Igave one of my Brotliers a Will I had
made a little before, and intreaied him, that, if
he had anry Kildnefs for me, he wou'd tale Care
to fee two Articles of it perform'd;' The firfl was,
tobury th Box, vwhefeiA' preserve your Lotters,

. Hh. k~

in the fame Coffin with my self; and the second
to go to £Enilia, ask her for my Heart, and deli-
ver it to Madam - to whom it rightfully
belongs. I likewise bethought my self of f me
small Matters I had Itolen from Calija, and ac-
cordingly commu-nicated these Scruples to my ho-
zest Confeifor. But after I had given him afill
Account of the whole Affair, he fairly told me,
that lince I had made so many firlitlefs jloum1ys
for her Sake, danc'd so many Hours Attendance
after her, thrown away so many. Sighs, and been
at the Expnzce of so many Tears upon her Ac-
count, I ha'd 1onrofly deferv'd a better Reward,
than a Patch-box, a Tooth-picker, and a small
Ear-ring, i.T;:j!lited to, and therefore need not dl.i
quict my self upon that Score. Thus you fee,
Madam, what a World of Care I took to dSfcbarge
my Confcie7rce, that I might troop offlike a good
Cbifiia;z. But, as it happen'd, I might have
frv'd my self the Trouble of making all this Pre-
paratico;, for Heaven conitceted it self to fee me put
all in Readis.i-s for this unwelcome Voyage, with-
out carrying 'Maters any farther. In ihort, my
Fever abated, and I began to perceive some small
Glimpse of a Recos-y. 'Twas at this critical Jun-
cdure, when my Relations, intending, I suppose,
to take their Advanltage of my 7Yeaknefs, which
had not as yet wbolly left me, propos'd a Match to
me; and I, to convince you, that I was not yet
filly recover'd, in some Manner corfented to their
Proposal: But no sooner did I find my self in
Statu quo, that is, re-eltablifh'd in perfet Health
of Mind and Body, but I took Care to escape the
EccleJiaflical Trap they had laid for me, and made
the belt of my Way to Paris, where I. am at present,
but cannot tell you to what Place I shall remov~
next. However this I know, Madam, that let my

]-?i carry mrn to whait Part of the World it

pleaePsv

pleares, I flall inviolably preserve that F; iendl.!ip,
which I have sworn to you, and that nothing
can give lie greater Satisfai7ion, than to find
by your Letters; that you maintain the fame for
me, who alm,
Paris, Madamn,

Tour nmof obligcd, anrd

.iof obedient Servanti
1O Ca0iia.
:.o tell her u'bat cruel Defgs hi Despair had

thrbown hzi uzon.
-HE N' I parted from yonu Yelferday, I left
V you with a full Resolution to mnldl; my
sis, that I might have the Honour of ple1,ig you
once in my Life, and free you, as you are pleas'e
to express your self, fiom a troublesome Pefecu-
tor. But hitherto I have not put my Design in
Executioln as having not been able to determibne
what Sort of Death to pitch upon. At firfP I had
an Inclination to imitate the late Celadon, of amo-
rous Memory, and plunge headlong into the Ri-
ver; but then I was afraid left the Water would
carry me to the Banks, as well as' him, and the
compalfionate Aympihbs save me, in Spite of my
Teeth.' Then the Fancy took me in the Head, to
go and decently hansg my self before your Door,
and copy the Example of Ipbis, who is the firfc
Lover upon Record, that brought a Halter into
Reputation; butIconfider'dupon feond Thoughts,
that it wou'd eternally refleX upon your Family,
faould I make a Gallows of your Door s and be-

H'h ^ fdes,,

fides, hanging is afcuivy Sort of Death, to which
I have had an Ave;/ion from my Cradle. In the
next Place I thought of poisoning my self, but soon
laid it aside, believing that Poison was no more
able to difpatcb me, than .Aitbridates in the Days
of To2e, since I had made it in a Manner familiar
to ite, by being so long accuftom'd to it ; for mind
me, Madam, having fed so many Years upon
Fear, Despair, and A1elancholy, which are the
rankest and most violent Poisons in Nature, and
all this without any Prejudice to my Person, I
think I may f7fely conclude, that I may venture
now to take a finall Dose of Ajfntick or Antimony
and yet do my sis no Harm. After this, I be-
t!ought my self, that to pierce my Heart with a
Dager, was as pretty an Expedient as a Man il
my Circumfiances cou'd wij ; but when I refle-
ded, that Lucretia had ended her Days with a
Piece of cold Iron, I soon abandon'd my Design;
for why the Plague should I pitch upon that Sort
of Death, which a foolifl Woman formerly chose,
who died out of laadnefs for having committed
that very Action, which it makes me flark mad,
that I have never yet been fofo -rtunate as to com-
mit ? And therefore since my Despair proceeded
not from the fame Motive, as that of the undif-
creet Lucreti., what Reason had I to chute the
fame Dejiiny ? In flort, I spent the whole Night
in cojidering of this Affair, but cou'd come to no
finalRefolution. Now, Madam, Iwou'd not have
you t.link, that the Fear of dying has hinder'd
me all this while; no, 'tis the Manmer of doing
it, which has given me all my Unleafiess; for to
zunload my Conscience to you all at once, since I
have found so many Plagues and C(offs in my
Life. I wou'd, by my good Will, taft a little Plea-
fuie at my Death. And this, Madam, I might
Gxpet to fnd, cou'd I put a certain Tbought, that

lias,

has suddenly come into my Head, in Execution;
which is, my fairefl Creature, to die between thy
Arms, to expire upon thy Bosom, to be flif'd
with thy Kilies, and fmiother'd with thy Embra-
ces. I am very well fatisfid, before I have made
the Experitmnt, that there is nothing of that Hor-
ror in this Sort of Death, as there is in drowning,
hanging, and the like. Oblige me therefore so
far, as to let me die in this Manner for since
yrou are refolv'd upon my Death, what ignifies
it, whether it be given me with Pain or Plea-
Jin'e ?

A Billet from a Lady,
TWFJerein fiJe desires him to :help her to a Song

Jfe had forgotten.
Remember, that Yesterday, towards the Even-
ing, I heard a Sonnet or Madrigal, I cannot tell
you which of the two it was, repeated to me by
I don't know whbo or where; but this I rcmember
full well, that it was one of the prettiest Fancies
I ever heard in all my Life. This treacberous Me-
mory of mine has inhappily loft it, by the fame
Token, I have puzzled my Brain, to no Purpose,
all this Morning, in Hopes to recover it. Prithee
favour me so far as to try, whether you can re-
rieve it in yours, for I shall have Occalion to
show it in certain Company to Night, where it will
be very acceptable. I can' give you no other Marks
to know it by, but that it talks of GCpid's having
been offeveral Trades but what those Trades were,
the Lord of Oxford knows for me, and concludes
iith this Line, or something like it,

H h 3 l 5er

7ls ere he flops vp one Iode, he leaves a Score in tbe

Room.
If your li'em7ir y can't hslp you to it, I expet your
.,iMf should fupply.the DeftiS of it, and fend me
before Evening either the So&g I ]ave foigotte>, or
one of your ;wn upon the famie Sjecf, full as
good as the other. Farewell

Have not the leai Idea of the Madrigal or Son-
net you write tome for, and indeed how should
I ? My Memory can't help meto't; for, to the bes
of lmy, Rememberance, it was never int;nfied with
it. As for mny Aiife, I have taken a great deal of
;ai' s with her to put her in a good iumour, and
D;W, jaata her to comply with your Commands : Be-
'Ides, that the bates nothing so nmuch as to write
upon Comp4lfolj ; she told me very bluntly, that
ie lav under no Obligation to pay the Debts of
your MIenIorny, or gratify a Lady's Demands, thiat
cou'd forget a fi.e Piece of Poetry so eajly, You
must ovni. Madam, that the had some. Reason for
what she said ; for since you have loft so charm.
ing a Song, as this last appears to have been by your
Cwicer. for it, how can it be imagined, that you
ihoald take any Care to preserve such foolish Words
as size ? At si .ndeed I was of her Opinion; but
upon feconid I houghts both alter'd ry own Mind
and: bers also, by reprefentisg to her, that you
rcu'd not oblige her more es tally, than by for-

t,.e: her srfis, fice, at the fame Time, you
· '
, : ..... .. . wouldi

S . . .;

would forget her blind Side. Upon this Cojidera-
tion, Ihe made the following Ballad I now fend
you; for I can't find in my Heart to give it a
better Name, wherein she has endeavour'd to follow
the blind Diretions you gave her, as well as 'twas
pipble.

Cupid turn'd Tinker.

(I.)
Fair Venus, they fay,
On a rainy bleak Day,
T77s lret her Cbild Cupid a packing:

" Get thee gone from nmy Door,
"Like a Son of a Whore,
" And lJlftwhere fland bouncing and cre

( 2. )
To tell t)c plain Trtb,
Our little blind Toutb
Bsat the Hoof a long while up and dow;

'Till all Dangers piri,
By good Fortune, at lt
He fumbled into a great Towmn, Sir.

(3.)
Then flraigbt to binfelf,
Cries this tiny fly Elf,
Since begging brings little Relief, Sir:

A Trade I'll commence,
That fi)all bring in the Pence,
And Jhraightt e jet vip for a Thief, Sir.

YcIki7ng,
2, Sir
(4.)
At Play-bolzfe and Kirk,
7Where he slily did lurk,
He fJole Hearts both from yolug and old People,

'Till at lft, fays my Song,
He had like to have fwng
On a Gallowis as higb as a Steeple.

Hh4

(C.)

7The wit h Arrows and Boa,
He a Soldier 7ltif go,
A2.d /Iraight he Jfot Folks without 7iara.tIrt,

He tbougbt it 7!o Sin,
7fh.2n his Hand was once in,
To kill you a Hindredt bs Mlor7zizg.

(6.)
W7Yjhe, e sotld. t7that bwe nmade
Little Gaii;s ly tlis Ti-ade;
W7'hat does our fly gracelfs Bliner,

Bu:t flraibt chan;gd his AStt-.
As well as his Coat,
Ad n bs
7! b sP.l pass for Tinker,

(7. )
E-ve yo' aey Hcarts to imci.l ?
Comre I .I be yiur Friend,
Or eyfe I e.p;ec ist a Farthing

Tbo' thbi're bu-rt to a Coal,
I'l so;n ;a.ke 'cm 1whole
.4d, Mids, is ntot tbis a fair Bargain ?

(8.)
But, Maii2s, have a Care,
Of this Ti'nker beware,
Siun tbh Rogue, to' be sets fiich a Face oi't.

/here he .[ops up one Hole.,
' true, by mjy Soud,
He'll at Iea] leave a Score in tbe Place on't.

Before I part with your Ladyship, I cannot but
remind you of your accuf/ng me, in your lat, with
being the lmolt faitblsfs Lover upon Earth. A
hideous Chrge! were it true; but, Heaven be
praWed, 'twill give me no great Trouble to jflify
,my fel, tho' in making this Justification, I shall
be frc'd to advance a certain Dohrie, which is
JrIt conmmmly receiv'd' I am perivaded, Madam,
iha£ there can be no greater Fidelity in the World;

'* t.han

than to ]henw it to fevral People at the fablse Time.
When a Man has promis'd it but to one Mistress
eee needs no mighty Stock of it to keep his Word
.with her. But when he vows Fidelity to some ten
or twelve Bona Robas at once, he ougbt, in my Opi-
nion, to be plentifilly furnith'd with this preciius
Commodity, to enable him topacquit himfelfof his
Promise. As for my self, Madam, I can bolnfly
boast, that I am possess'd of this happy Talent,
and am tle faithfilleft Man living to halfa dozen
lifjrefes at this present Writing.
tl all Love's Dominions, r challenge the Boy,
T Jflew filch a forward firank Lover as I:
So faithfil and true where my Promise is pafl,
.t the Ji' fl foincere, and so warm at the laji.
Imprimis, I've worn trae Allegiance to Phillis;
A,4d the fame I have done to divine Amarillis:
Then to Calia, the Fair, I my Heart did resign
1ext I laid down the Trifle at Iris's Shrine.
Califta then gently put in for the Prize,
Ncr did the coy Sylvia my Offering defpie.
But now you'll enquire, can they all quarter there ?
lYhy, Madam, my Hcart's large enough, never fear.

There's room for my Phillis,
And soft Amarillis:
And Cslia, the Fair,
OS7o leed not despair -
Of a good Lodging there:
WIith Iris, Califta, and Sylvia bfide.
Tes, Madam, this oft by Experience Eve try'd.
So large is the Place, and so plenteous nmy Store, )
I with Ease can prozide for Jix Mijre/mes more.
say, if you difnrufl me, e'en Jend me a Score. .
I don't know what your Ladyship will fay to
these heretical Principles; but you may be satis-
f'd I firmly believe them, having made this Con-
efoi to you, not only in terse, but in the Since-

* itY

cerity of Prose, in which I beg leave to adire you
that I am with the utmost Refpedt,

.Madlm,

Tour mofl obedient, c.
To [he Lady S-- e, who defir'd him to draw

the Charaler of his Rival.
.?atlam,

OU are certainly the most ingenious Woman
in the World at tormenting of your humble
Servants, so that 'tis really a great deal of Pity
you had not been Daughter or Wife to one ofthofe
Emperors, who took so much Delight in inventing
nea PniiJmnzrents to persecute the poor Chriflialis.
How ,obly had you succeeded in that glorious Em.
ployment, and what PleafJie woi'd it have been
to your good-ltatur'd Daddy, or Husband, to fee
the Fnritfid¢efs of your Invention ? All the To.r
tures the Gibbets and Racks of those famous Ty-
rants, had been nothing but down-right Sport and
Pajltiie, if compar'd to the Torments which
your fertil Genius wou'd have sonid out. Have I
not sufficient Reason, Madam, to entertain this
Opinion of your Cruelty, iince I have found, to
my Co/i, how dexterous you are in perfeciting your
Subjects ? Is it pofible to devise a more emphati-
cal Punilhment, than to oblige a Man to write the
Panegyrick of his Rival ? And yet you have im-
pas'd this cruel Nccty upon me. Since Adonis
has the good' Fortuze, I won't fay the Merit, to
appear lovely in your Eyes, you must e'en lay
your Commnadiis upon me to draw him as such, and
charge me not to let Envy or Jealousy have the
least Hand in his Piurhe: Nay, vwhat is more, you

expec

expea I ihould flatter his Defeds, and siet off his
good Qualities. This, as I take it, is what you
require me to do, in Order to please you; but,
Madam, is it polfible I ihould please you and 7ny
self at the fame Time? I need not inform you
sure, what a I1ortifi(:ation it is to praise one's Ri-
val even for his PeifeEionis; what mutt it be then,
to beforc'd to tell Lies in his Favour ? Do you be-
lieve, that because you are cbarm'd with his Me-
rits, I mulf be so too? Or, because you have
been pleased to make him your Idol, that I must
fall down and worsiip him in my Turn ? I appeal
now to your Ladyihip, whether you did not give
me ajufl Provocation to compare you to those an-
cient 1yrants, that perfccuted the poor Chriqiass,
because they wou'd not adore falre Deities; for
don't you exercise the fame 17jiijiice against me ?
But this is nothing, you are my Sovereign ; and
tho' it goes never so much agaiiJl the Grain, I
must obey; neither Ihall I scruple to sacrifice my
own Pleasures, that I may promote yours. For
this Reason, I will immediately take my Pencil in
Hand to draw the Picsure of your beloved Adonis,
and use all imaginable Precaution, that neither
Elvy nor Jealolsry shall be conce;rn'd in tempering
the Colours.

Adonis is well-fhap'd, and of a reasonable Stature.
'Tis true, some People think him somewhat of the
lowefl; but what of all that ? 'Tis rather an id-
vantage, than any Prejudice to him, lince no Man
can call him a great Coxcomb, without giving
himself the Lye. His Hair is of a fine flaxen Co-
lour, and curls moR deliciously, so that he may
boast, without Vanity, of having a fine Head.
Tis a downright Calumny, to fay, his Head is
none of his own; for I am intimately acquainted
with the Barber, that fold him his Periwig, who
has told me a hundred Times, that, like a noble

Gentleman,

Gentleman, he gave him five Guineas more than
it was worth. His Head stands between his two
Shoulders exactly, like that of other Mortals, up-
on a Pedefal, which, in Truth, is somewhat of
the Jiorteft ; but then, to make him mAnends, Na-
ture has supply'd in Thiclwefs what it- wants in
Length. His Complexion is as fair as a Lilly, and
indeed'twere next to a AMiacle, were it otherwise;
for, to my certain Knowledge, he owes the Devil
and all for CoJmeticks and Washes, fkrubs and
lathers his Phyz most unmercifully, and bestows
rome half a Dozen of lJafll-balls upon It every
Morning. His Eyes are blue and rowling, 'tis
true they are somewhat heavy and drll; but then
'tis to be confider'd they are only so in your Pre-
fen'e ; and. what lWo:Tr is it, Madam, if when
the Sin faincs in its Meridian Brightness, the les-
ser Str.-s disappear ? His Eye-brows are fair, but
over large, and somewhat Saracen-like, I mean,
when the Tweezers have not play'd their Part;
for vwhich Reason, I wonder at the Impudence
of his Enemies, vwho pretend, that he has an
egii7n,-fate Face. Whether Nature. was in a li-
beral Vein, when fie beflow'd a Head of Hair
upon him, I cannot resolve you, as not being
able to jride of it through his Periwig. but
this I am afur'd or, that Ihe shew'd her self ex-
treamly firgal, when she gave him a Beard; I
fay, Madam, extreamlyfilugal; for had he given
him one Hair less, she had ruin'd his Beard to all
Intents and Purposes. But blefd be the Fashion,
which extends its Empire over our Beards, as well
as our Habits, Alonis has just enough for his present
Occaion. His Nose is not to be play'd upon, be-
caufe'tis somewhat of the fiortef, which may be
the pbyficJ Reason, perhaps, why he does notfmell
Things at a Difance. His Cheeks are ruddy and
sanguine, and indeed well may they bluf, to be

plac'd

plac'd so near a Moutth that speaks nothing but
Ablurdities. In llort, the Turn of his Face seems
to promise no mighty Stock of Intelleauals but
hlo knows but his Soul is an errant Hypocrite, and
conceals it self on Purpose to. firprizs all the WJorld,
wvhen it makes its ji;l Appearance ? As for the
Qualities of his Body, 'tis certain he poflffes them
to Advantage: He is a profound Critick in his
Cloths; and tho' he duly employs half a Score
Holrs every Morning before his Toilette and Look-
ing-glafs, yet it cannot be jprctended, that he be-
lfows them to no Putpofe. He dances to Perfection,
so that one may with Jlrfica fay of him, that if
he has no Mercury in his Brains, he has enough
in his Heels; He makes a good Figure on HorsE'
bck1, I cannot deny it, who the lalt Time I had
the Hotour of your Company, receiv'd an unlucky
Fall from my Horse, which he afterwards 7nounted
before you, and 7anlag'd with an extraordinary
good Grace. 1 remember it full as well, as if it
were but Yesterday, how plentifully you Ilagight
at my Misfortune, and what mighty Commenda-
tions you beftow'd upon his Horfemanflip. But,
Califa, the Miracle is not so great as you imagine;
for there is always a firange Sort of Sympathy be-
tween Beasts, and that, perhaps, might occasion
the good Intelligeice between the Horse and Adonis.
,As for his- Courage, I have nothing to except against
it, he is not afraid of hewing his Face in the Field,
and I believe wou'd not scruple to hazard his Life
for a Trifle, because he knows very well, that in do-
ing so, he hazards a Thing of no very great Im-
portance. He is liberal even to Profusion, and flings
away his Money like Dirt; but 'tis among his
Songsters and Fiolers,, becaiife they compliment him
with the Title of his Excellence. He is free in his
l)ifcourfe, and has nothing of the Diffemnbler in
him > but,. CaliJfa, those that alway speak what

they

they think, don't always thilk what they fpea
He is no Liar, and all that know him, will do him
the Juitice to clear him from that Imputation; for
there wants a great deal of JPit and Meemory to qua-
lify a Man for that Callivg. As for Wit, his Ad.
verfaries give out, that he has little or moae i but
I am read: to fake up the Cudgels in his Defence.
for, I think, he has given: a convinci'ig, and ini
deed an nmdiniable Proof of his Wit in loving you.
But to this, the others reply, that he loves you
mneeril becauf e
he astold you were amiable, and
only iuffers himself to be carned down the Stream
with your other Admirers. Tis true, his sJdt.

W's nt was never polish'd by Education, he has no
more Relif) for Learning, than a Horse, and is a
perfe&t Strl:ger to all the Sciences: Bu', what is
eq',/ly happy for him, he imagines he lkows them
all, and something Siore And as Happiness com-
fJis in one's tbinizig hinmflf happy, so perhaps
'fit and good &1Sfe may consist in one's thinking
himself vitty. If this Inference holds good, no
Man ever posess'd it in so eminFnt a Degree as Ado-

sis, .nce no Man ever had a better Opinion of his
own Aerit. At the fame Time, Califla, we must
own, that you have principally co7ltributed to fix
this Error in him, by heaping your Favours so
profizisly upon him, and that 'tis pardonable in a
Man to deceive hiinfelf, after he has' deceiv'd a ITo-
m-an of your Wit. As for his Devotio7i, 'tis agreed
on all Hands, that it muff needsbe very great, for
he never fails of flewing his fine Person at Chuirch,
when you are there, which is'as much as to fay,
he goes thither very often. He is as.difcreet, as a
Man in his Condition well can be, and, to' be sure,
boajis not of Favours he never receiv'd from you.
In his ordinary Conversation, he pleases not one
In a Million; but what .figifies that, since he is
so happy as to please ypu, and you alone are all the

W~orb

yo0rld to him. One cannot fay, without grossly
fiatterig him, that he rallies agreeably ; but the
geafon is, because all Raillery is downright Slan-
der ; and Slander surely is below a Gentleman of
his extraordinary Ifortb. He tells his Stories with
a very ill Grace, and teazes all those People to
Death whom he designs to divert with them; but
tell me after all, what mighty Honourr is it for a
Mlan to be a good Story-teller, in plain EngliJb, a
good Biffoon ?
And now, Califta, I have finished the Piture of
your dear Adonis, as well as I was able. I am a-
fraid you'll not think it altogether so charming
as the Origi7tal; but I find my felfoblig'd in C, o-
fcienice to inform you, that Love is a most deceitful
Painter, upon which Account 'tis not safe always
to belive the Representations of so known a Flat-
terer. Perhaps too my 3ealomlfy, whatever Care I
took to hinder it from having any Hand in this
Affair, has not seconded your Intention. Well,
be it so then: However, I dare aflure you, CalifJa,
that my Jealoztfy is much more jnjI than your
Love, and better knows how to draw Piaures after
the Life. I am,

adam,t

Towr most Qbdiwt Vassal, &co

179

A'r. T. BROWN 's Pocket-Book

of Common Places.
T O fee the Number of Churches and Conven'
T 'tides open every Sunday, a Stranger wou'd
fancy Loidoi all Religion; but then to fee the
Number of Taverns, Ale-hbufea, Uc. he wou'd
imagine Baccbus the oilly God, fhatis worihipp'd
there.

A Man need not go out f Londoni to hear Bar-
barifms and Nonsense they are. the universal
Traffick from Limeboufe to l ilbank.

If no Trades were permitted, but those which are
useful and necessary, Lombard-Jfreet, Cheapjide, and
the Excbange, might go a begging: For more are
fed by our Vanities and Vices, than by our Sir.
tue§, and the Neceflities of Nature.

Tradefmnen often break to get an Estate, as Tar-
tars retire to get a Vidory.

All the Advantage Quality has of us, is, to'
eat Asparagus at Cbriftmas, Mackarel in February,
and Larks in Nove.lmber; run in Debt, without
Fear of the Baylifs, and put out no Lights in the
Winter.

Men often interest Providence in their minui
test Affairs, when they forget the greater. Thus
a Captain in Slanders, dining at a Tavern, was
pawn'd for the Reckoning; but jus in the Nick,
the Earthquake pay'd it, by knocking out the
Brains of his Holt.

I wonder the Tax-Projeaors in France .have
never thought on an Imposition on Ice! Unless

- ~~~. . ...- ^ - . .. ... ..

-----

terey have pass'd it over, as not reaching the
Poor.
Some wou'd have us believe Camps the Schools'
of good Manners bui: certainly we night as well
learn Sobriety in a Tavern, and Chaitity in a
Brothel.
Tirejia. knew more than Silomozi ; for the blind
Propbet knew the Pleasures of botli Sexes, which
was more, shan the nine hundred Concubines cou'd
impart to the K ING.
I have found the Women generally againit Cir-,
cimcijion, and the difinembring of the Spaninh Mo-:
Iwcby; I can't tell their Reason, inlefs it be, that
they are not for leffeniing the Members.
For a Prince to think to fupprg' a Facion, by
bribing one or two of its Heads, is, to draw' a
Rent-charge on the Crown ; for when Men know
they are pay'd for it, the Party will never want a
freth Supply of Leaders.
It's a great Advantage to Traders of all Sorts,
to come into a gobldcuitom'd Shop: So'the Pope
gets Money by succeeding St. Peter, Dr. -Gibbons
by coming into Dr. Lover's House, t5c.
, How little is popular Favour to be depended on
Four Years ago Abifopbilis was voted deferviig of
the Kiig's .Favour, and now voted to be try'd for
Mifinanagement,'.
A Faft-Day is only a Vacation from Cheating,
and the Drunkard's itoly-day.

After all, I know not, whether a' nice Taste be
not rather a Curse,- than a Blefmng; for by that.
we are pleas'd with fewer Things ' and the less
PlJafir-e, the less Happiness.
E'en Avarice has something to fay for it self;'
and Sir, son Cutler, perhaps, took as muchPleafure'
to fee his Giinia's, as Neal to squander thei n a-
way.

| h ' eers;

LaYers leave generally perplex'd -;ills, and
why? But that, as they got'their ' ::v y-, Lar
their Heirs may fpcnd it inthL f:ina :;ii.'r.

AMan, that had a bad Mi.-nory, ! ght a
i3emoradumu-Book, but never r-ed r t-incmber he
had one. A notable Instance we had t'other
Day in a certain Bifflop, who forgot where he
had lay'd his Book of Memorrandans.

Vainlove is a damn'd repeating Poetaferi, and
his Tongue is like a perpetual Motion, never ly.
ing still: Yet fpeacing of a Brother of the Quill-
'Tis a thousand Pities, fays ie, - He is the ho.
xeflcft Fellow in the World, only be talkstoo mluch.

In the Mosaic Law, if the Whiteness had over-
spread all the Body, then the Affeced had Liber-
ty to go abroad for Air; if some Part of the Bo-
dy was free from Infection, he was to be kept up
as uriclean. From which I observe first, That Pu-
trifzciion is more contagious before Maturity, than
after. Secondly, That Men abandon'd to Vice,
don't so much corrupt Manners, as half Debauchees,
half good, and half evil.

If the Eucharifr be the true and real Body of
our Savios i, why do you administer it on Fridays,
when you prohibit the eating Flefth

Tobacco, Ale, and the Protestant Religion, the three
great Blelings of Life.

The Roman Sepulchres were ereaed near the High
Ways, to put People in Mind of Mortality; for
which Reason we find the Inscriptions addrefs'd
to the Viator, or Pafenger; , ill imitated by us in
our Churchi-Tombs.

Caligula gave his Horse Incitatits a Parsonage;
and no doubt on't, but wou'd have difpens'd with
the Horse's keeping a Curate to officiate, because
he had an Impediment in his Speech.

The YJwi) ORccrrlny seems never defign'd for
S th'r World, but calculated for a narrow Terri"-

tory,

tory, since they were oblig'd to go thrice a Year
to yerifal .

A reverend, but laborious dull Trifler in his
Book, wou'd persuade us, that the Gardens of the
Hesperides and Alcinouis, are taken from the Garden
of Paradise; yes, as much as the great Bed at

ware, was borrow 'd from that of King Og ; acid
he might as well have drawn the Pope's Triple'
Crown, from St. Peter's Triple Denial of our Sa-
viour.
Mythologfis are indeed very pretty Fellows, and
are mighty Unravellers of the Fables of the old
Etbnicks, discovering all the Old TeJfament con-
ceal'd in them, Thus Eve was Ate, Parndora, and
Proserpina: Afrea's leaving the World, was ELnocb's
Assumption in the fiery Chariot: Because Kii'gs,
in Scripture, are ftil'd Gods, therefore the Pagans
deify'd their Kingsi supiter Ami7on, Bacchus,
and Pal, are painted with Horns, because Horns,
in the &Scipture-Phrafe, signify Power. They
might, after this Rate, if they had a Mind to it,
bring Gaiimmar Gurton in, and make her, and
Mother Shipoii, anid Bess of Bedlam fignify'd the
lWitcb 6f.Endor.

The thriving Citizen makes it a chief Article
of his Creed, that he mull do every Thing, that
will help to promote Trade 5 for that, to him, is
the Law and tbe Prophets.

inena's Piety runs incefTantly out at his Eyes.
tie weeps'at the burying of his Nurse; he weeps
at the Loss of Palislnz;

When Dido found hei self abandoe'd, and out
of Defpaii was contriving how to despatch her;
self: The Trojan Prince very fairly goes to his'
Vessel- where he sleeps so soundly, that 'Mierciiy
must come to awake him.

Ii ' ,r,-

1. I, bell. cw.
Appian made a gross Blunder in his History;
where he fays, That the Romnans had Kings for the
Space of an hundred Olympiads; whereas, all the
World kno0ws, that Tarquin was expell'd A. U C
244. and there's 156 Years Mistake in the Matter
But ppian visibly contradiets himself too else-
where, where he places the Didatorfhip of Syyain
the I75th Olynmiad,

The Pgan Sacrifices for the moftPart, were at
the Charge of the Publick. Theodofs uses it as an
Argument to-the Heathens, to turh Chrifiins, be-
cause their Religion was so coltly.

Cyder an ancient Liquor mention'd both by
Tertullian and St. Auflin; the former calls it Succim
ex Pomis Vinofifimum. The other writing against
the Manlichees, who abRfain'd' holly from Wine,
which they'objeted to. The Catholicks'charge 'em
with drinking the Juice 6f Apples, far more deli-
cious then Wine, or any other' iquor. From
these Pafiages of Tertulliam annd .i in, who were.
both _fricans, Cardinal Perron (who was born in
Jefey of Protestant Parents) thinks this Liquor
was irit known in Africa, from thence pass'd in-
to S'pain among the Bifcyneers; and from themin-
to Arma7lndy.

Jfl.int cenfur'd by some for the Digrefionabouf
tlhe Antiquity of the Scythians and .Egyptiais, aa
Saliiif1 is by Scaliger, Poet 1. 4 for 'his tedious
Spetches ; fbr spending so much Time in defcri;
Ling the Ar-s hrati7n -in making a Parallel be-
t'.veen Cato and CJfar, prater Hijfori& Arglmnemltuzi
and tracing the Conspiracy of Cataline to the 0-
riginl- of Rome; not'to mention his two tedious,.
impertinent' Prefaces- ' '

C'erifa had told Aleas
a erwsam' Hefperiam venies, ubi Lydius, arva
1lter opiza virum, leW fluit agmine Tybrs.

And yet he fays afterwards

Incerti quofata fer;ant.
The Ancilia among the old Romzans (as a Reve-
rci' .url-or asserts) had some Reference to the

V-sri Urim and Thummim: As much as they
have to the Spa7iJ75 Arms in the Tower.

AriJ?'t.i,::s's Quarrel with Socrates was, because
he: ',-' the Comedians, tho' he would go to fee
E,'ip. frag. for which Reason Nub. A&. 5. Sc. 2.
he jcers a; Eurip. Poetry.

'lhe C louds did not contribute to
the taking away Socr. Life. Palme- * 'Th con-
rius has Ihewn that he liv'd 24, if frf7 ,learn.

. * e Men he
not s$ Yeare after. Tis evident, liv'd 16 ears
from the Play that was aaed be- after thi pay.
fore Cleon's Death, which happen'd
inthe xoth Year of the Peleponelian War, at which
time, Amiiias was the chief Magistrate at AtheMs;
A1i,. 2. Olymp. 8. But Socrates was accus'd when
Lachetes govern'd, Ann. I. Olymp. 95.
three and twenty Years after the -- 717,o er-
Death of Cleon. -- Anton. - Thyfi in m .,..
his Comments upon A. Gellis, 1.c. tls, n 1
,
17. pretends that after AriJf. had ex- Val. Max.
pos'd Soc. 'i his Comedy, call'd The
Frogs, (for so he'miftakes) the next Day he was
accus'd and condemn'd.
4pid HIomerum Alci4nots Odyff. 7. Ulyffi pee-
,gino Filiam offers optans ltt illam velit accipere, f
vocari gener, quod qzidam reprebentdunt.

Circe better employ'd by Ovid, than by Virgl.

11i 2

In the latter ihe is represented weaving: In the
former ihe and her Companions.

Vellcra motis
A'-ulla tralbut digitis, nec fila fJequnttia ducurlt.
Gram'li;a dfpDiom;tt, fpjrfcfq;Jire ordine Flores
Secrclnult calatbis, VMa.iafq colo;riblus Herbas.
And this seems to be the fitter Diveriion for an
Enchantress.

lkacrobius IL. c. .17. blames Vigil injutly, for
making the Grounds of the Latin War so trivial.
Homer's Ilias turns upon a less, the Tears of a
Parson's Daughter.

Errorem admiiit Lucanus, cum dixerit:
Fimdat ab extremoflavos Aqdilone Suevos
A.!bis.
Nam Suevi Rheno propiores.
Par error in Sequentibus.

---- Ganges toto qui solus in Orbs
Oqiis 7zaficeiti co7ira;ia folvere Phabo
Adet.
Ifrer fIidem et Padus, et Thamess in orienteft
Fliunt quin Ganges in Autrum exit.

Ijfdore pretends that 'till Aigufits's Time, the
Romanms made use of cs infead ofx; and Papias
adds, that after the Nativity of our Saviour, it
came in Fashion, in Horern crncz, in Respect to
the Cross; both which are false. For in the Co:
lonna rofr-atia, the oldest Remainder of Antiquity
in Rome, we find exfociuiit for efiugunt.

Errores Philol.
Infraaus idem Servio ac invi&us; male. Nam
;semo ita ufirpat Latinorum, aptld quos infraai funt
ie fraS, et v-Ui . Cruferius Plutrrchi i-terpres in

vit

vita Caonis Utice7fes iuve' reddit infraium, fed
peipeaim.

Pria's Iliad 2. debortavisHe~oren a congre.s'u curn
.kllk tcardem filbjicit, iTanij TCroW \ C. *
' Ni-
i1 aiudire ci.:tis ad contumIeliam Heor potnit. Vids
q;idd Cerdamis flpcr hac re dicat, p. 665.
Some Writers of no mean Note among us, have
wacte uv of JenviJl Testimonies to prove the Tri-
nlity, as some Rominb Authors have done the fame'
to lipport that moniterous Dotrine, Tranfub-
f,.!iiation. Particularly Galatinus in his firRf
book de Arcanis Catbol. Verit .
c. . fays, That the
ancient Jew s may bh thought rzot o mucb to have'fore-
told T';ings to come, as to have reported, like the Evan-
gelis, Tiings already done. To this Purpose Rabbi
Clb!,,1?. and R. Judas are cited by them, tho' in
the i'laces alledg'd, we find nothing that makes
to that Purpose; as also R. Simeo;'s Revelatio Se-
cretoitm, a Book compos'd in Utopia; and R.Ba-
rachias in Eccleliflen.

As Mahomet fays of himself,
Ego quadraginta Virorum in mcis lumnbhs Vires bab0o
So may Ed- ds with more Truth assert,
I have a Stock of Impudence and Calumny, e-
nough to furnish the whole Town upon Occa-
lion.

Scaliger, de Emend. Temp. lib. 5. pretends that
Troy was taken about full Moon, and the Begin-
ning of Spring. Petronius in his Fragment, dc
expugzatio0e Trojac,

Jam plena Phabe candidlna extulerat jrbar.
To excuse Moses for killing the .gyptian, 'tis
merrily enough pretended that he had the Spirit

Ii 4 of

of Prophecy upon him when he did it; andknewv
that out of this Fellow's Loins, no Profelite
'should ever arise

It deserves Observation, that the Names of the
stwo Magicians that oppos'd Alofes, are fill re.
maining with meetiJb, Chr.ijilan, and Pagan HiRfo-
rims, tho' loses no where calls them by their
Names. But 'tis probable that the Agyptima
Priests writ Memoirs of what happen'd, ahd so
cut of their Writings, for after the Captivity,the

-:ws had no old Monuments but whatare still
extant, the Names of the Agypticn Magicians
might be taken.

,.trids, Pri.inznq!q; rtf&t;vimn ambobuts Achillem.
Legendumn Atriden. Neq; enim Menelao favus
fiait, fed Agamemnrni quem confodere voluit Ili-
ad ; deinde i tres, Agiamemnonenm, Priamunm, et
Maeicaum proponet, quo paeto dicit favum am-
.bobus ? .

Guy Pati; in his Letters, tells us, that beig
Phyiiciai. to Gafedtiis, and-telling him that he
was at the Point of Death, he anfwer'd him.

Om21.' p;¥-cepi tq at; amnio mecun ante peregi.
In frome Cduntries the People are Slaves with-
ou: a itanding Army, as in Poland, France, f c.
w.here the Tenants hold at the Willlof the Lord;
and' cou.f-quently are not indnftrious' o build and
plant. . ::

Poggiui tells of a Mlan that gelt himself, to
know -whether his IVtie --- he being jealous
of her.
.-,i,'i, u'^e^i i a, fta'o i?2 gyptlim ocais et di
; . . .

° cuHJilO fuimfe navis flridens quam t entus pone re-
qslatur. - tod falJifimzr cuAm Alexandria flet ab mr.
%is bis mille, tamen Jelper eft littorea.
In Agyagas, if we may believe Laerttis 1. 8. there
were eight hundred thousand Inhabitants ~.Joi-
idas xr.dao.wv o7yici.o'fla verum mendurn eft in in-
neris, qui curn per literas miinerales compeltdiofe fri-
beaitUr facile potuerunt 7r &' x mintari. ., ua ratione
fiarnm it pro viginti Myriadibis, Ofringenta scriberen-
,iU. Neq; enim babuijtfe Agrigelntln fypra 20. Myri-
ades, i. e. 200 thouiand his verbis docet Diodorns
SicubLt, 1. 13. 'Axeyyavl~yoi pJy ^o-jv 7r7.» TC'
eA .=,,=e_)~ cru-v c'v i y.c. xc sl aTiS TzWy
.4coi t .wuOjo w.

Yohn Dunton's Atheniants, it seems, assea the Ho-
nour of being thought Originals ; and it must be
confefs'd, to their great Honour, that they are so:
For most of their Etymologies, their circular Rain
bows, nay, Vhat is more furprizing, their very
Translations, are meer Originals: And so is eve,
rt Thing, in short, but their Poetry, which is a
feeble Imitation of Jordan s Verification.
As for their great Skill in Etymology, I shall
inttance in two,viz. Surplice fromfiJperandplico,and
Punch quaji Paunch. As for the first, it is call'd
in Latin Superpelliceum, and is far enough from the
Derivation- they .brdught: And as for the latter,
Punch quaji Paunch, it is like Hat quasi Hate, because
a Man hates to be without a Hat.

The Athenian who told us his Wife never long'd
for any Thing but {he had it, is defir'd to tell
her, that if Ihe longs to fee an ill-natur'd Block
head, the need not fir out of Doors to fee the
Sight. ' y-

Ajwslhe
. 44 .~~~~~~i~~~h I

Nympbas Baccho adhibere, will pass no where for
Bawdy, but only amongRi the Atbe.iians; where.
as this Phrase does not signify to pimp for Bac.
cbhu, or to help Baccbhu to a Covenit-Galden Cooler
(which seems to be their Mittake) but only to a
'little cool Water. And in this Sense, the feve.
reft Ear in the Kingdom, may read it without
Offence.

,neid. 1. 2. eamq. aleo siper unus eram &c.

Sunt qui fequeites 22. veJfiu r riihnt, at
Scaliger, 1. 3. ca. II, , a2rd 23. genllaos
elf evincit.

.Ab imbscillifate lhumana
-Cowly falfly represents Pidar, as irr.-gular. The
'4ntiJropbe always answers the Strophe, and the
-pods each other.

In the Engli8i Play, Oedipu makes an Allu-
iron to the Decorations of the :.Aben!anJ Stage,
which were not invented 'till a hundred Years
after.

The German Soldiers won't fight without Pay.
Even the Gods Neptune and Apollo, trounc'd Lao-
2uiedo for cheating 'em of their Hire.

zuliata in his Epitles, tells us, That the Fig-
Trees in Yudea, were seldom or never without
Fruit, the Old not falling of, 'till the New came
on. This may afford Light to the Palage Mat.
14. 1 . The Time of Fruits was Inot yet come.

The Publisher of Petronitu, cum notis Variorum,
recommends the reading of him, to those that
would underfand St. Paul's Epistles.

Mr F-- e, in his Account of yerfey, tells us

'-*
' ' ' of

of a Charter given a Man to hold during Life,
and five Years after.
Jofita takes no Notice of the Pheniciams peopling
of AfJic, and erecing Pillars at Tangier yet Pro-
copius de Bello Vandal. lib. 8. affirms it, and is be-
liev'd.
Rablais has not been more extravagant in his
Garagantzua, than the e',piJT Rabbies in their Sto-
ries of King Og. They tell us, that Monarch
had got a mighty Stone upon his Head, deiigning
to ruin the whole Israelite Army with it. Down
comes a Lapwing, and pecks such a Hole thro it,
that it fell on his Shoulders; and by a Miracle,
his upper Teeth suddenly extended, kept it fast
from Motion.
Poeta loquutus eft cum in principio AJned. dixerit
Laviniaq; venit littora, at curn in perfola Palinuri,
portufq; require Velinos, quia Scil. Suo tempore fji
wlminbabantulr, minis excllfal eft.
Florus fays, that Cafar perfu'd Cavelianis uif;
itn Sylvas Caledonias.
The only Thing I envy you in the Country,
is, your Women; and there, 'tis true, you have
the better of us and a mighty Blessing it is, if
you knew'how to value it aright. You know, I
have in my Time, had some civil Correspondence
with the London Ladies; but after all, I don't
like them. I have the fame Quarrel to them,
as the Parsons have to the Laity, they know too
much.

Militant Drunkards here below. A Passage in-
coniftentr'with the affeded Gravity of those strait-

lac'd

lac'd Moralists, the Poultrey Reformers, whoplace
the greatest Part of their Religion, in the: Opu O.
peratitm of bellowing out of Hc2kizs and Sternhold.

'Tis customary, for Poets to commend one a-
nother, like the two famous Sword fmen in Begss
who gave it under one anothers Hands, that they
wiere brave Fellows.

Compliments, like Funerai-Sermons, ounht in
Stridhlefs of Jultice, to be paid to those Peifor.
mances only that really deserve them alnd that
even in those Cafes, the Incense is not worth one's
Acceptance, u.lefs free and unrequested.

Vanity makes the French loyal, and boaftof
what their King does.

Lucian makes Prometbeus cite a verse out of Ho-
ir, that liv'd long after.
Dr. Heylin in his IntroduAion to his Cofmogra-
phy, tells i of some People that make Arifotle
ro be our Savior's Prmcurfor in Naturals, 'as St.
y-.5! was in Spirituals. He might better have
made Prometheis a Type of his Crucifixion.

When the Senate had once permitted the Sol-
diers to eleA Galba, and had confirm'd that Ele-
ition. more Emperors were'elected Abroad in the
Field by the Legions, than at Home by the
Senators.

Three Leions kept their conitant Residence
here, viz. the iixth, the twentieth, (both firnai'd
irx'j) and the eleventh; but in the declining
State of the Empire, when the Rowans were forc'd
to recal them for the Defence of Italy, then over-

run

run by the Northern Nations; the Scots and Pigs
so harrafs'd the poor Britains, that in Hopes of
Relief, they.call'd in the Saxons;

Incidit in Scyllam, &c.
Jofepbus, all the World knows, fludisd to make
his own Country great, even at the Expence of
Truth. Thus, that Moses might not appear a
poor Fugitive that fled into the Wilderness, he
makes him the General of an Army in Athiopia,
and married to the King of the Country's Daugh-
ter.
King Henry the VIII. in the Year 13s8, conli-
dering in what ill Terms he frood with the Popes
and Cbarles the V. for his late DefeCtion from the
See of Rome, and his Divorce of Queen Katberinc,
thought it advisable to provide for his Safety,
by building in all Places where the Shore lay o-
pen and exposed, CafRles, Platforms, and Block-
houses.
Arifiotle and Plato, tho' Common-wealth-men,
call'd the Government under the Epbori, Tuecvvi
s ;9' T Tueavvszov.
When we came there, we found two solemn
Pieces of Antiquity, the old Gentleman and
is Lady, coughing at the Fire fide very conju-
gally, and answering one another like two Birds
in a Cage.
The. Colle&ion of Canons and Decretals pub-
lilid by Rzculpbhs, Bishop of Mentz, under the
Name of Ifidorus, spurious. Every one was fur.
priz'd at the Novelty, but no Body durst ima-
gine it the Work of an Imposter. Pope Nicbolas
and his Sicceffors, underflood the Value of them

* so~~

so well, that they built the Canon-Lawupon this
Foundation; and 'twas not 'till the I4th Centu-
ry, that learned Men began to doubt of them.
One of the strongest Arguments that was used to
rejea them, was taken fr6m the Silence of the
eight first Ages.

Foreign Gods, without enquiring into their Me-
rits, were, withlefs ado, made free of Rome, than
one can get into the lufieft Corporation in Eig.
lad.

'Tis a Mliracle; that Ed---ds, when difcour-
sing of the Sybils, forgot to tell us, that the Sybil
which came wit h ;Bor ooks to Tarqquii, was line-
ally descended from the old Woman at Endur.

St. Anfibr pretends that the Magicians fail'd in
the third Plague, to shew the Defit of human
Philofopy, when it comes to the Mystery of the
Trinity.

Virgil's Narration of Palimns,'s Twimming three
Days, defroys what St. Evremont tells of the Po-
ets preserving Probability in Actions meerly hu-
man.

In Heroick Times, even at FeaRts, Men did-
not eat of Diies in common, but every one
had his Portion a-part, and the best Man had
always the greatet.

Veiling of the Bride, a decent Custom that
common Sense might di&ate to them, without
travelling as far as Palefine for it.

Gregc;.y i .ia;sn, in his twentieth Oiation, has

this

this remarkable Passage, 'd, aulkc wakotX wccaxoc,
ey~sEv©'; as merry a Sight as it would be to fee
two grave B-- s lugging one another by the
Beards in a Counsel.

si lial the Emperor in his first Oration de tIx
dibus Coitantij, tells us, that Xexes took up xe;Co
iv"J y. sX.>.aJcrx edgy.a in Preparations for the Gr.
War, which is impossible, since Xerxes began this
War against them, in the 6th Year of his Reign.
Erfebits, 1.I. c. 8. His. Eccl. quotes Jofeplbts's An-
tiquities, and makes him relate the Punihlment
vith which God afflidted Herod for the Murder of
the young Children, leaving out the Names of
ida the Son of Saripbaus, and Matthias the Son
of Margalotbus, who were slain by Herod's Com-
mand, long after the Infanticidium, which ]ofe-
phbs mentions not at all.

'Tis strange, how the fore-mention'd Passage in
Joepbus iMould escape Jijfin Martyr in his Dia-
logue with Trypho the Jew. \How Tertillian and
Cem. Alex. should so itrangely forget to urge its
Authority against the Jews, and that none should
ever take Notice of it before Eusebius.
Clemt. Alex. pretends that Miltiades was behol-
den to Morfes's Hifiory, for the Vitory which he
obtain'd over ,the Perians.
No mentioni of Christ, or the last Judgment in
the Sybils only an Interpreter gather'd out of
them
Eun, quemn revera Regem habebamnus appellandirti
fogs effe Regem, si Salvi efe velimuf.

,w,

The -E.enes first heard of in the Time of 7oa|
tban, the Brother of Judas Maccabdus, about 15.
Years before Cbrift, a Sort of Pythagorean Jews
mention'd by ofephus, L. i . c. 9. Philo de vita Co.
teInplativa, describes their Way of living; errone.
ouny apply'd' bjy ztebint to the primitive Chri
itians.

Bracca a Mantle, such as the IriJ) wear. Tu:
nicafgo impofita, worn over their Coats and Cas-
focks.

TertulinX inieighs againf the Tragedians for u-
ing the Ccthwiunus, and endeavouring to make our
Saviour, who said, 2Tu cannot add one CGibit to yrw
&taie,) a Lyer.

Uly/es in Homer, fays of himself,

----------- 77.CI Gcl
J'ABS^X'7Tr-ti; ,£W y *'.J \x ve' ou .r¢ Ie'xa
Parun-apte difaum colis ad CGdum eveh!i pose.
The Blind and the Lame (fays Mr. Gregory)
mean the Tutelar Gods-of the Place, whom the If-
raelites call'd so in Derision. Else why ihould
Dmi.ri fay, 2. Sam. 5, 8. MIy Soul hates the Lame and
the Blind: Or the People of Israel, That the Blid
ad Lame Jholud not come i7to the House.

FundW Varrb vocat quenm pos mtterefuinda.

The following E PIGRAM on

Dr. OA TES.
Scripts es in Tergo, Cet dum finitur Orestes.
A merry Argument to prove the Antiquity of

Oxon higher than that of Cambridge, be-
cause Adam was a Terra Filims before he
turn'd Prvaricator.
UR Fatbers took Oath, as of Old they took t'ives,
To have aid to bold, for the Term of their Lives.
Rut we take our Oaths, as our throres for oar Ease,
Aid a Yhbore and a Rogute may part when theypleaje.
The End of Mr. Browii's Comór'n-Place-Book,

Kk In,
3K
.... .... _ _ _ .

' J46
In i mi mat uru n obi L,u A llZ

VAYNARD , FiRiaD; i vDARIi R
B AYARD, M.D. Virginis
crudl if', 1 nc1 , qu pridlie
Id. Jj,. Ainz . 1Jiom. 697.

Piam Aniain am '
c vit.
-Rgo eroiditpmo ppsrt:i:l foIpor
i UL;gct Banar daul ? iT-ecie lhgubre
Ta7ia cl:rit, F J:ver. s
,:','e m7ndos gra-viore plvrco.
() Anna rccli dLge;.erJis jfupo !
GO,;: !;: :: -:;::-. S,:;. .A.or c' 'ci:s
o.

c)0 i. : i.
r iit'r;;m s1i ,:tis
Picrzi,.n i;:c..V'2 da t.ii FfisI!
,'ptem dccorros iid,,,e Ly;e Alodos ?
-.¢::.: vocs l::.'S ,Z ?v7,r: .;' tur.s ?

-0 ';j.7 (,;7:. :i ,'\ 7r..'?ts
·, G:-,ia Pallas ;mtt;-i:t ij Jfin;?
; .-
; 'j': i '.i.-
tC- .tt i Ji-'' ?i . '
. , r; .
', .'. :.:,!,.-..t
C,- - I,' _ .
r .e/}.

A,;)d¢
__I_

Apollo dlxit J]ic tibi felnill
YaJace!ti s oris; stc penetralia,
Aialgiiq; zatill. bOres,
Et vaCiig patuere fi'des.
L i tPlie l l~zdt tqi , sz'tb 7CIIAn
,
Lii;! q:tidl orbe?'i p, i~zerai~ 'an prcniaa.

L ):,al co7:tzuna1x, venti, propitgo
Joliis 'nedircentur aiotans,
(J7110 ·is acrcum pPiggee gefliat,
-eis mntor a.mi d;i-n;t c'um

C'nr b' ridr un fjigells Cbonetes
Sy;m71A minax per inlalCn ja&et.
Non te Sagittis, znt reliquas, 'zier
Lu;t Cupido emnp asiznsrsbe,:
Ilplevit zngentem, 9 capaces
1gnggge swro tetigit dlas.
9c2jalcn trenieiti vidit in arbore
NMofes beligno Lumine splendidum,

Dceifos per En-ores comarum
Mobzlibus sinuiare gyris ;
Ca flZAimma frondes lo~mbetet hznocens,
slvnis jocosos inclstiens metais,

Ilia7idiq; veslirent calores.
Attoniisumn ]ne frande vepren.
Utcunq; verno jTura neceisc-.s
Te flare Decrprtam aGbfluteit Twis,

( sisid 1nl7ui idilgern its atro ?
Parte pJi ?sleliore vivis.

Sic Je renfacens fuere fertili
Phcebeus ales AlMte remninat,

Brifoq; committit fideli
fEeritos redit.mns anrs.
_inc te omicanmtm Virgineo in Chore
Cornara caflis excipit ofctlis,

Scurmanna te vifam Jiupefceni
IJde cilpit, fidturq; visa.
Circmn decora ferta m7nt gerels:
Czii jlnweiltJs colfnit, aureosl

ifirata Sermonses, g alta
dnre fonos bibit eficaces.
Te Ca7.dor, qi'. coiflia te ides4,
Te ignara Zonam folvere Caflitas,

Te Veitas blandum renidens
.Etbercis comitantur. arvis
Preflona felix, nbere qua fjut
Annum talili ! te enseores canenct

FaKfam Camnna, tu freii
Perpetsa rfuer aJtra famn.
Aec SmyrMn vatfis MkMii prens,
iSec qu Alaronio m Mfamta protiilit
Durabit sqe, Oracla atum
Sipqii' habeit ceebrata vsrL.

A WALK,

A
W AL K

ROU ND
London and Weflminfler,

EXPOSING
The Vices and Follies of the Town.

By Mr. THO. BROWN.

. . . .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Aa a
_ __ __~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A

' (3)
A IWalk round London and Weft-

minster, Expofino the Jzices and
Follies of the Town.

A Tavern.
Aving over-night carry'd my Indian
Friend to the Tavern, whence, in
order to entertain his Curiosity, I
introduc'd his Pagan Worship into a
Christian Society of true Protestant Fuddle-caps,
among whom, tho' there was much Preaching
over their Liquor, yet there was no Vice or Va-
nity, but what, in its turn, had its ascendancy
in the Company, which occafion'd my Indian to
be more particularly inquisitive about the Tip-
ling Rendezvous, where he had been so lately
oblig'd with such variety of Amusement. There-
fore, that he might better understand what had
pass'd his Observation, in answer to his Impor-
tunities, I made the Smoak-dry'd Infidel shew
his Ivory Teeth, and grin like a Sun-burnt Plow-
man at a Mountebank Oration, whilst he heard
the following Account, which for his further In-
formation I very frankly gave him.
That place, said I, is a Tavern, and a Tavern
is a little Sodom, where as many Vices are daily
prafic'd, as ever were known in the great one ;
Thither Libertines repair\ to drink away their
Brains, and piss away their Estates; Aldermen
to talk Treason, and bewail the loss of Trade;

A a , Saints

Saints to elevate the Spirit, hatch Calumnies,
coin false News, and reproach the Church;
Gamcfers to shake their Elbows, and pick the
Pockets of such Cullies, who have no more Wit
than to play with them: Rakls with their Whores,
that by the help of Wine they may be more Ini
puedent and more Wicked, and do those things
in their Cups, that would be a Scandal to So-
briety: Lovers with their kifireffes, in hopes to
wifn away that.Modelty with the Soothing Juice,
which had been a hindrance to their Happiness,
so that they may fall to without Grace, and give
a pleasing Earnest to each other of their future
Affec&.ons: Thither Sober Knaves walk with
DIiunkez Fools, to make cunning Bargains; and
over-reach them in their Dealings, where, cloak-
ing their mental Reservations with a grave Coun-
tenance,they will tell more Lies about a Hogshead
of.Tobacco, than Tavernier in his Travels does
about Mount E>tna: Thither Young nQality re-
tire to spend their Tradesmens Money, and to
delight themselves with the Impudence of Lewd
Harlots, free from the Reflecions or Remarks
of their owa Servants, whilst their Ladies at
home are doing themnfelves Justice after the like
m.lnner, and perhaps for want of better Oppor-
tunity, are glad to break a Commandment with
their own Footmen.: Thither Bullies Coach it,
to Kick Drawers, and invent new Oaths and
Curses, and in Feasting, Rattling and Blustering,
to lavish away that Scandalous Incom called a'
Petticoat-Pention, tho' doom'd the next day to
a Three-penny Ordinary: Thither run Sots purely
to be Drunk, that they may either wa(h away
the Reflections of their own past Follies, or for-
get the Treachery of their Fritnds, the Fallhood
of their Wives, the Disobedience of their Chil-
dren, theRoguery of their Lawyers, the Bitchery

; of

of their Paramours, or the Ingratitude of the
World, that they may drown the Remembrance
of'paft Evils in the Enjoyment of the present:
Thither Beaux flock to {hew their Vanity, Drink
Healths to their Miftrefles, boast of Conquests
they never made, praise Beauties they never saw,
brag of Duels they never fought, censure Books
they never read, damn Authors they never knew,
talk familiarly of Noblemen they had never the
Honour to speak to, commend the Vertue of
Women they have made'Whores; and rob those
of their Reputation they could.never conquer:
Thither Cowards repair to make themselves va-
liant by the Strength of their Wine; Fools to
make themselves witty in their own Conceits;
Maids to be made otherwise; Married Women to
Cuckold their Husbands; and Spendthrifis to be
made Miserable by a Ridiculous Consumption of
their own Fortunes. In short, No People are
Customers to that Ware-house of Debaucheries,
where Ral[es and Extravagants surfeit their vicious
Appetites at the Price of their own Ruin, but
what are less careless of their own Good, than
they are of the Vintners; except such who hive
a Ifrong Guard upon their Purses, and a stout
Bridle to their Appetites, and they may venture
to sip off a half Pint at a 'Sitting, without the
danger of contrating an ill Habit, that may at
last expose them to the Worlds Contempt, under
the scandalous Plague of an empty Pocket.
But Prithee, fays my Tawny Acquaintance,
Who was that fine Lady that flood pulling a
Rope.,'and skreaming like a Peacock againit
rainy Weather, pinn'd up by her self in a little
Pew, all People bowing to her as they pass'd by,
as if ihe was a Goddess set up to be worfhip'd,
and that it was Blasphemy in a Mortal to lay a
Finger upon the beauteous Deity ? A Man may

A aa 3 fad

find, said 1, by your Innocent Simplicity, how
easily, by the Vanities of this Town, a Stranger
may be impos'd upon; That very Taudry Bulie-
body of a Female, that you have such Heavenly
Conceptions of, is no more, I can aflure you,
than a Stage-Coachman's Daughter, and by all
Relation has sufficiently prov'd her self true
Flelh and Blood before ihe was advanc'd to the
Chalk and Spunge,which are the principal Badges
that belong to that honourable Station you be-
held her in; but being nearly related to the
Matter of the .House, he has put her into his
Bar, in hopes some time or other she may top
her crack'd Pipkin upon some Fool'of a Drawer,
who has Patience enough to prove as contented
a Cuckold as his Mafler; so that The has little
else to do, but to Dress, Paint and Patch, ogle
her Uncle's Beau-Cuftomers, and Tattle at the
Bar with an Amorous Extravagant, that she may
Coax him with her Smiles to Dine there the
oftner, which the Fool does, more for the fake
of Raw Flesh, than either Boil'd or Roasted:
Tho' at last ine disappoints him of the great
Felicity he hopes for, and only treats him with
kind Glances, and a few Amorous Witticisms,
as long as his Money runs flush, but as soon as
that begins to fail, then her Shooing-horn Looks
and Freedoms, are turn'd into moody Pouts and
a scornful Reservedness, that makes the Block-
head quit the House with Damn her for a Jilt;
and so leaves my Lady to play the fame Game
with the reft of her Admirers.

I profess, fays my inquisitive Acquaintance,
so long as I have been in England, notwithftand-
ing the Benefit of your kind Inftrufions, I have
not yet iearn'd to distinguish Female Quality
from the Wives and Daughters of Mechanicks,
,ny other way than by their Coaches and Atten-

dance;

dance; for the former dress with as much Gaity
as the latter, speak as contemptibly of all Per-
sons beneath them, and as enviously of those
above them, as they do cry Fob at any thing
that offends them, and magnifie any thing that
pleases them, just like Quality: And as for their
Vertues and their Vices, they are so exa&ly alike
in both, that it is as difficult a matter to find
the difference, as to know a Cock-Linnet from
a Hen by.the colour of their Feathers. But pray
excuse my Impertinence, that has almost lead
you into a Digression, and inform me what Tun-
belly'd Mortal that was, who met us in the Entry
with a low Bow without his Hat, and with a
Blue Flag before him, as if he had been an En-
sign in some notable Engagement, and as an
honourable Badge of his remarkable Bravery,
had ty'd round his middle his own flying Colours.
That Hatless Hero, said I, as you take him to
be, is the Lord of the Family, the Controuler
of the Houfhold, Governour of the Celerepedeans,
one 'of the Priests of Baccht, who receiv'd his
Ordination at Fuddlecaps-Hall, that keeps his
Library under Ground, and when ever he Preaches,
'tis to a Congregation of Drawers over his own
Liquor, in order to reform them from Tippling
below stairs, drawing Pots too full, Cozening the
Bar with false Reckonings, and giving Bumpers
of Palm-wine clandestinely to the Cook-wench.
He has also the Art of changing his Temper as
often as the Camelion does her colour; and as
the latter receives its TinEure from that Body
which is nearest it, so the former does his Prin-
ciples, Humour and Disposition, from whatsoever
Society he is a Member of at present. In High-
Church Company he always rails against Occafi-
onal Conformity; among the Low-ChurchSaints
is a Stickler againfi Episcopacy ; and is a violent

A a a 4 Moderator

Moderator among such Bifarious Anythingarian,
that always make their Interelt the Standard of
their Religion. He is a very proud Fellow in
his Heart, tho' his Head drops more Bows in a
day, than falls from the servile Noddle of .that
Cringing Slave, who is under the Plague of being
a Gentleman-Ulher to a Lame Countess. He is
always most ceremonious to thole Customers
that he gets leaIt by, and will bow oftner to a
niggardly Alderman over his Half Pint, than
he will to a Jolly Rake that spends a Guinea at
a Sitting; because he knows that a dignified
Citizen expecs more Homage than a Man of
Honour and Quality; not that he uses his
Fawning Cringes as any Tokens of a Submissive
Temper, for his Pride is even perspicuous in
the lowest of his Humilities, for his Nods and
Scrapes are only the Effeas of a- Habit that he
acquir'd when he was Bar-Boy, which he resolves
never to leave till he comes to be Lord-Mayor,
or at least Sheriffof London. Ingratitude is one
of the Black Badges of his Charaaer, for if
ever you find him to do a Friendlhip, or a Cour-
tefie, to any Fool that has beggar'd himself by
Extravagance, to make him Rich, you may
Score it upon his Bar-board, where it would be
more wonder'd at by all Specfators, than a
Blazing Comet. In short, He is a Member of
the Corporation of Sicophants, who, as he has
serv'd an Apprenticeship to false Reckoning,
Lying, and Subterranean Adultery, claims a
Titie by his Trade, to poyfon us with bad Wine,
deceive us with fair Words, and humour us in
our Follies for his own Advantage: Therefore;
:is Libertines do Whores, we ought to use them
for our Pleasure, as they do us for their Interest;
that is, to look upon them as Mercenaries, who
i. maintain through Wantonness to gratifie

our

our Vicious Appetites. I ihall observe your Cau-
tion, fays my Moletto Comrade, but pray who
was that Corpulent Lady that we met in the
Entry, coming out of the Kitchen, with her
Head so finely drefs'd, and glittering Pendants
in her Ears, that so dazled in my Eyes, I could
scarce behold her Countenance? That shining
Lump, said I, of cloven Mortality, is that ne-
ceflary Evil in such a House, call'd, the Vint-
ner's Help-mate, whose Business it is to have a
Superintendancy in the Bar, to over-look and
dire&f in all Culinary Proceedings; to Scold at
theMaids; be Civil to the head Drawer for
her own Ends; to Grace the Bar upon extra-
ordinary days; and to oblige her self with a
Friend in a Corner, when her'Husband is nor
at leisure to give her Nuptial Consolation.
This is the Life she leads, till high Eating, a
Lazy Life, and Canary Sops in a Morning, im-
proves her to the Bulk of a Squab Elephant,
unwieldy in Bed, and' too big for a Bair and
then if her Husband be able, Ihe's remov'd,
with two or three of her Daughters, to a little
Country-houfe at, Hamflead, where she Surfeits
upon Sack, Smoaks Tobacco in an Elbow-Chair,
and Snoars away the Remainder of her Life,
till one of Rtlffll's Rumbling Caravans runs away
with the Load of Kitchen-ftuffto the Town of
her Nativity, where she defir'd to be bury'd,
that her Country-Folks might fee, tho' her Mo-
ther fold Nappy Ale in Black Pots under a
Thatch'd Roof, yet her Daughter had arriv'dto
the Honour of being bury'd Lady-like out of a
Hearse and fit Horses; but let her take care, for
no sooner will her back be turn'd, but ten to one
that the Widower takes up with his next toler-
able Cook-maid.

Dollors

Dodiors Commons.
C Oming thro' Paul's Church-Yard, and hav.
C ing gaz'd on the Noble Pile of St. Paul, that
Emulator of the St. Peter of Michael Angelo in
Rome; we took a little Trip down on the left
Hand, to the famous College of Civilians, call'd
Doaors Commons. The Etimology of the Name
I kno.v not, nor is it very material, whether it
be, that the Advocates are but Common DoSors,
or, that the chief thing they are remarkable for,
is, their Commons; or that it is the Common un-
inclos'd, where the Doctors feed on their foolilh
Clients, I know not.

Here you are ply'd with Porters (if you es-
cape the little Appendixes of Proders at their
Shops, which they call Offices) who demand
your Business; whether you have any Will to
prove, -r Administration to take out, any Ca-
veat to enter, whether you want a License to be
Marry'd;,. or a Divorce if you are marry'd, and
the like; they can convey you to a Protor, that
can supply. all the Commodities of the Place,
cheaper than the Market-price.

What strange Place is this, fays my Indian?
This, fays I, is one of the Relicks of Popery, and
the Terror of Seamen. Here a Man that is wea-
ry of his Wife, may, upon some honest Evidence,
be separated from her; and a- Wife that has
play'd the Whore, and run out her Husband's
Fortune, may sue him for fcparate Alimony.
Here a Man must come for a Liberty,or License
to iofe his Liberty. Here Executors must come
for Authority to perform their Trust; and here
defend themselves in not performing it. Here
are Prooi-rs, Docors, Apparitors, and the reft

of

of Pickpockets under odd Names, that would fain
still do what they did in the Times of Popery.
But the Reformation having par'd their Nails,
they are full-of Regret, and always founding the
Praise of the Power of the Ecclesiastical Autho-
rity. They are all profefs'd 3ac- ,. because
they hop'd by King 9ames to restore their Au-
thority, and by consequence their Perquiiites.
They are a drunken, roaring, nonsensical Gene-
ration, that have abundant Zeal without a Scru-
ple of Religion. They are a Pious fort of A-
theists, and Ignorant Profeflors of the Mystery
of Iniquity. They are hot for High-Church,
tho' they never go within any. They should be
Scholars, but that they find the Common Road
sufficient to do their Business and get Money.
They are utter Enemies to Whigs, because they
would reduce them under the Law of the Nation.
They are for preferring the Common Law to
the National, because one advances, the other
destroys their Interest. For notwithstanding
tleir Noise fdr the Church of England, they
would declare for that of Rome, if they could,
because they could get more by it. I In short, a
Doctors Commons Man is a Scholar without Lear-
ning, a Zealot without Religion, a Lawyer with-
out Law, and a Medley of Popery and Refor-
mation, without Reason or Honesty.

I have enough of this Amusement, fays my In-
diAn; when Right and Wrong are confounded
and funk with Terms. Let us therefore make
our escape from the litigious Congregation, said
I, for we are not secure in the Words we fay
here; for Scandal is their Province; they are
nice Judges of Billing/gate, whose laudable Quar-
rels of Whore and Rogue, Bastards, and the
like, are the Fund of their Prattle and Feats.]

We

We jogg'd on with some Expedition, till we
got into Drury lane where passing into RueIl
Court, a strange fort of Noise drew us into-an
Amulf.emnt, consisting as much of Jargon as this;
but what affeced only such as were pleas'd with
the Folly, - colenti not fit injuria; Father Bur.
gefs himself is a much more plealing and innocent
Amnuement; so we enter'd Daniel Burgess's Meet.
ing-Houfe.

TJce SPresbyterian Meeting-EHotft.
M /R. Burgess's Meeting-House, in RufIel Court,

1 falling in our way, my Indian and I ven-
tur'd 'in to take a view of the Godly: For the
Godly in this'City afford an Amusement, as well as
the Wricked. This is the Epitome of the whole
Kirk; and by this one you rhay judge of the reft.
Here fits a zealous Cobler next to an Alderman's
Feliow, and he uses less Ceremony with his God,
than his Customer; for to the latter he Itands
Dare-headed for sixpence; but to the former will
not do it for Salvation ; believing, perhaps, that
a Bird in the Hand is worth two in the Bujh; or that
being necefarily one of the Ele&, he is too fa-
miliar with God to stand upon Ceremony. This
cannot be said to be the House of God, for that
the Scripture fays, is the House of Prayer; but
the verv Lords-PraYer here, is as Apocryphal as
the Macc,-b-ees. 'Tis true indeed, when the Hol-
der-forth has plaid the Spiritual Buffoon for two
or three Hours, he gives you a Desert to his
Harangue, or what he calls a. Prayer; that is, a
Rapiody of ltuf without Head or Tail; for had
it MIethod, Order, Connetion or Sense, it would
be exp!o;-ed under the Notion of a Form of Prayer,

a

a Goblin as frightful as the Whore of Babylon, and
has furniih'd many a zealous Scots Miss uobhn with
an Exercise for his Lungs, when Sense and good
Doarine are not at hand. But tho' they are
such Enemies to Popery, yet they sympathize in
praying in an unnowln Tongue,,or at least in a
Jargon neither understands; for Sense in their
Prayer, as well as in their Sermon, would favour
too much of Human Invention, and not give la-
titude enough for Entblhtafm and Cant.
Here fits a Holy Sifter, full of Spiritual Pride
in her Face, the Word of God in her Hands,
the Parson in her Eye, and the Devil in her
Tail: She pays her Quarterage jufly, and that
makes her reda in Curia with her Guide; for a
Saint may make bold with her Husband's Bed for
her Gallant, provided she make as bold with his
Purse for her Preacher; nor can they much be
accus'd, if their Docrine of Predeltination be
true, for, they needs must o whom the Devil drives
Neceflity has no Law, and if they offend, 'tis
the fault of the firfl Mover, whose Machines
they are. So that if they pick a Pocket, be-
tray their Trust, bear False' Witness, commit
Adultery, Incest, &c. the Faults not theirs,
they are but meer Passives, and what they can-
not help they cannot susser for. This may be
one reason, the Ten Commandments are not in
their Meeting-Houses as well as in the Churches,
because they are only for the Wicked, who own
Free-Will, and not for the Godly, who deny it,
and cannot fin. The Promises and Threats of
the Scripture have nothing to do with them,
for those are direcIed to free Agents, who are
Miafters of their A&ions; that can comply with
or break the Laws of God, as they think fit.
Such were the People of God, Sinners and Pe-
nitents; but such are not they, for repent they

can-

cannot, the Saints being without Sin. But if
they are not the Children and People of God,
I know not who'll take 'em for Saints, butthe
old Gentleman in Black,. the first Preacher of
this Notion. But this discovers them not so
parcimonious as they would be thought, when
they are at the Expence of a Guide, that is as
much a Machine as themselves, and can do no
more for them, than the Wire in the Finger of
the Poppet-Player.

I have been confidering, fays my Indian, why
your Churches, or Places of Worship, are so
light; whereas our Paoods are almost quite dark,
illuminated with a Lamp, which serves only to
discover the Image of our God, who ( all other
Obje&s excluded ) takes up our whole Thoughts
in the Adoration.

O my Friend, reply'd I, you mistake the Bufi-
ness of our Places of Worship: The Women
come to fee and be seen; the Men to ogle, or
get the Repute of Religion and Holiness; for
that gives 'em Credit and Trust, and Credit and
Trust make 'em rich at the Expence of those who
confide in 'em. Did these Saints here come for
Zeal and Devotion only, that Taylor's Daugh-
ter would not be set out thus, and equipt like
a Countess, to draw the Eyes and the Hearts of
the Congregation from Heaven to her: Nor
would that old Maid be drefs'd like a Girl of
Fifteen, in hopes that Paint, Patches; and the
Religious Ogle, may get her a Husband at last;
believing that Men cannot discover her Age,
Ugliness, and Ill-nature, under the double Dif-
guise of Body and Soul, Saint and Hypocrilte. Nor
would Alderman -- young Wife lay open
her panting fwvelling Bubbies, roll her black Eyes,
and divide her Looks so between Heaven and
Earth, as if she had learnt the Art of serving

two

two Masters, the: FleJf and the Spirit,at the fame
time; nor would 'her Husband be so fond of his
Folly, in appearing so publickly, watching her
more than the Motions and Gestures of his Do-
fine. He gratifies his Vanity to expose her to
view finely dreft, and to the belt Advantage;
but then the Remembrance of his own Impotence
makes him afraid of every one that casts an Eye
towards her. Thus his Wife, not his God,
brings him to the Meeting, and his Heart rifes
no higher towards Heaven, than her Eyes, or
the Parson.
It would indeed be hard on the Ladies of this
Persuasion, to be debarr'd lhowing their Faces
and Persons in their most engaging Airs, since
their Pulpit supplies the Playhouse Mufick, and
the Scene to call them together; and perhaps
this is the reason the Teachers will not let their
Hearers go to the Theatre, because they'll be the
only Pimps to their own Congregation, which
they encreafe by their Declamations against the
Stage; since here they kill two Birds with one
Stone, get the Reputation of Saints, and the
Pleasure of Sinners. No, no, my Friend, the
Adoration of God, sincere and humble Prayers,
and grateful Thanksgivings, is the least of the
Business of this Place; and I dare be confident,
that if they made a Law, that no Woman should
come dreft, or bare-fac'd, most of the Congre-
gations of the Town would dwindle away, and
the Playhouse Audience encreafe.
Do you think that honest Mr.- comes to
Church for Devotion or God's Sake on Sundays,
when he has been serving the Devil all the Week?
Or the gay Mrs. M- for the Exaltation
of the Spirit, on the Lord's day, when The has
been for that of the Flelh al the Week ? Or that
the venerable Madam W- that covers the

Bawd

Bawd so effleually in the SanCimonious Vizor
of a Godly Leer, comes for the fake of the Do.
arine, or the Man ? While her Zeal for the Par.
son makes her pass for Religious, and the necef.
fity he has of her, gives her the Authority of
Prudence, and so helps to fleer the Flock, by
providing Husbands for their Daughters, and
Wives for their Scs, while she and the De-
magogue lhare in the Brokerage. No, my gooa
Friend, the Meeting is their Spiritual Exchanges
where they barter Hypocrifie for Pleasure or Pro-
fit; and they are able to keep their Countenan.
ces, tho' the Cheat be universal. It was said
by Cicero, That he wonder'd how the Augurs could
meet without laughing in one another's Faces:
The fame Reason would make one wonder as
much at the top Fanaticks, but that Use and In-
terest remove the Difficulty, and a natural Som.
ernefs and flavijf Temper make it eafie.

Tho' they are Enemies to the Lord's Prayer,
they make it up in their Zeal for those of Da-
vid; and here the Form goes down as glibly,
in their Bawling, which they call rnging, as A-
loes Pills in the Pulp of an Apple. This fiows,
that -if they are Enemies to the Church-Mufick,
it is, because it is Harmony; whereas their Sing-
ing is a fort of Jarring Medley of Sounds, as
disagreeing as their Notions; not much unlike
the laudable Diversion of every one in the Com-
pany's singing a different Song: Nay, they have
so peculiar a Gusto for Discord, or odd Sounds,
that, I believe, they would admit the Symphony
oLthe Tongs and Key, tho' they rejec the Har,
mony of the Organ. Every thing here indeed,
seems so odd and contradiCory to the reft of the
World,
As ij(as Hudibrs has it) they roorhip'd God forpite,.

tbo'

tho' the Ingenious Butler seems a little out in
one of his Words; for they do not Worship God
at all, but the Teacher; for as it is not proper-
ly call'd the House of God, but Mr. Buigefs's,
so Mr. BureJfs, not God, is there worlhipped.
Prayer and Praise is the proper Worlhip of God,
but here they meet to hear naniel lay about him,
with his merry Stories and "Theatrical A&ions,
,!ich is at least 'an Amusement they think worth
their while. When he has done his Harangue
to the Congregation, he begins one to God,
with whom he's as familiar, as with his Text,
and handles him as roughly, and with as little
Refpe& to his Truth and Majesty; which still
makes it his own House, for no. body else is ad-
mitted to pray, unless they can divine what he's
about to fay, and to join with him in his. If he
makes a Speech to the King, with an Address
of Life and Fortune, he studies it before-hand;
but he deals not so with God, whom he thinks
is oblig'd to hear all his Nonsense, and so speaks
quictquid in Buccam venerit, whatever ltarts into
his Fancy, to amuse his Congregation, and make
a Noise, for that is all I can discover in these
/Meating House s.
The odd Looks, the Groans that eccho one
another i ome with their Hats on, others off,
some writing, some ogling the Women, some
the Teacher; his merry Postures, and Pop-oun-
ay of Delivery, with the Whimlical Medly of
his Words, is, I confers, an Amusement, fays my
Indian, and such a one, as I never saw in my
Country in my Life; we thero converse only
with the Gods in the Pagods; here you come
only to hear Men. True, said I, my dear Friend,
we only come to hear Men, but then there
Men deliver the Word of God, if we believe
them, tho' what they fay be never so opposite

Bbb b to

to the Written Word, yet Bigottry in the Con-
gregation, and Impudence in the Holder-Forth,
will palm Inspiration upon us. As for what he
fays beyond, or of his Text, which he often racks
as much as the Tyrants of old did the Primi-
tive Martyrs, till it die under the Torture.
But this brings in Money, and Money buys Land,
and Land is an Amusement they all desire, ia
fpight of their Hypocritical Cant: If it were
not for the Quarterly Contributions, there would
be no longer any Schism or Separation; for who
can imagin, that when two or three thousand
are maintain'd like Gentlemen by the Breach,
that they will ever preach up healing Dodrines,
and dispose them to Vnion ? If it were not for
the fake of Earthly Comforts, they would not
be so conversant with Heaven in their Pulpits;
but Heaven's their Traffic, and why ihould they
Miare a Commodity, which costs them nothing,
vet brings in so good a Return?

The fairest thing I know of them is, that they
wear neither Cafockl nor Gown; for being no
Priefis, and without Ordination, they refute to
wear any Prieflly Ornaments of Diftinfion from
Laity;. but that is not owing to their Modesty,
but pride, to diftinguiih themselves from the
CIergy-and their own Congregation at once ; they
go in Blac', as if they daily mourn'd for the
PWickdnefs which they daily committed.

Tir'd with such a Composition of Dulnef and
Vick.rdnefs, my Indian and I departed from this
Amrnfernenr, and left it to those who had Flegm
and Hypocrife enough to endure it all the Year
round. So leaving Father Daniel thumping the
Curnion in a molt immoderate manner, we pait
on to the next Amusement; which was a Qua-
Ler's Meeting-Hoitfe: Where

'9
The Ouaker's, Meeting.
1WTE difcover'd the very Ague of Religion,
W which yet after its ihivering, has its hot
Fit of Zeal and Noise. This See arose from
Nailer, as the Presbyterians and Independents from
the 7efuits: These indeed may plead a greater
Antiquity, as having their Rife in the days of
good Queen Bess; but the Jhalting Congregation,
not till the days of the Martyr. Some will have
it, that the QOakers are the decrepid Age of Re-
ligion, where it ihivers and shakes for want of
Touth and gigour: And indeed, if we may, from
the Appearance judge of the Matter, this Fan-
cy is not ill-grounded; for here is scarce any
thing of the Christian Religion left, but every Man
having the Light within him, as they have no
use of Guides, so they are not so improvident
as the other Seftaries, to be at the Expence of
any. Every Man, nay every Woman too, is
here infpir'd; the Spirit speaks in them, they
are but the Stentonorophonic Tubes, thro' which
that speaks: But it often proves a lyin Spirit;
and I believe, if they had no more Light than
this gives within them, they might still walk in
the Dark.

This is the most Sociable Society of all with-
out the Pale; for here every one may speak Non-
sense in his turn, and the Women are not ex-
cluded the fame Benefit of Talking, which for
ought I know, not only keeps the Females to
their Congregations, but gets Profelytcs; or
might, if well urg'd among the Sex. So not be-
ing obliged to hear all and fay nothing, one
hears his Neighbour speak a great deal to a lit-
tle or no purpose, that he may do the fame by

B b b z him

him or her in their turn. t knew a pious old
Matron, that every Morning us'd to scold her
Maids about half an hour, not that they were
in any Fault, but only, as she said, to clear her
Pipes. So i believe these People only meet t6o
'make a Noise by way of ,Exercise for Health's
fake, all others being unlawful on the sirs days
These are more just than the other DifTenters,
because, as they pull not off their Hats to God,
so they pull them not off to Men; whereas the
others ihall cringe and bow to any Man they can
get Sixpence by, but ne'er veil the Bonnet to
God, by whom they may get Heaven; it may be
indeed, because, contrary to Christ's, their King-
dom seems to be of this World.

To me, said my Indian, there Ouakcrs, as you
call them, seem the Bedlamires of Religion, and
their Meeting Bedlam, where all that are freak-
ilh and mad come together: Do but confider
when we were at Bedlam, what odd Objets we
saw there: True, said I, and here I fee fully as
fantastic and whimsical; and I wonder none of
their Lights within mov'd them to set Oliver's Por-
ter at liberty, since he was throughly qualify'd
to speak in their Congregations. What can be
a more pleasant Amus}ement, than that odd Fel-
low that speaks now: His crop-ear'd Hair and
frizzl'd, short round Forehead, too great goggle
Eyes like two Fish-ponds, and his high thin Nose
which is like a narrow Ifthmtts, hinders them from
joining together; his skinny, flabby, hollow
Cheeks, that like a piece of half-tann'd Leather,
is drawn over his Jaw-bones, while his thin Lips
and wide Mouth stretch and open to let forth
the Light within, in a hollow unmusical Tone,
and show his Toothless Gums with here and there
a ftragling Stump, that promise us, however he
barks he cannot bite; his Mountain Back overlooks

his

his Head, and seems to anticipate the With o
the Cursed at the last day, for the Mountains to
fall on him and cover him; with his long scraggy
Arms, and lean Hand and Fingers, with which
he so belabours the Rail on which he leans: His
Belly is the Counter-part to his Back,'and seems
to poise the Machine, and keep it in Equilibrio
on his Catftick Legs; but what Amzfemnent he
finds in harrafing his worn-out Carcass in this
manner, I know not; unless. it be a Madness he
can't help, and in ladnefs, they sty, there is a
Pleasure, which none but Mladmen know.
But now there rifes up a Monster of another
kind; and sure he mult have a large fWare of the
Spirit to inform that Qtagmire of the Flejh. HIis
Head is as big as Gogmn-gog's in Guitdhalt, and his
Face not behind the Sign of the Saracen's i only
his Eyes are so diminutive, that one would think
them retir'd to behold the Light within ; for what
with his large Beetle Brows, which like a Pent-
house overlhadow them, and the Agitation of the
Spirit, one would think himn groping in the dark,
without any at all: His Cheeks are like two
blown Bladders, and a Trumpeters seem no
more to him than a Puppets: His ruddy car-
buncl'd Nose, seems as if he fuck'd his Infpirati.
on from Bacchus more than the Bible; and we
may at belt suppose him drunk with the Spirit,
and now difemboguing on the Brothers and Siflers;
and when the Spewing-fit is over, he'll fit down to
take a Nod: His Mill-poft Legs are well adap-
ted for the Load of his Body, which looks like an
Atlas able to support the Spheres, but that he is
never like to bring his Shoulders near enough to
so Heavenly a Burden; like Sir John Falstaff, he
is not made for mounting, but muff have a
strange Alacrity in finking: The Noise he makes
is as particular as his Person, and no more to be

Bb b nl-

understood than his Religion; 'tis perfecly the
Language of the Beast, and, as well as the Apo.
calyps, wants Yeureux for an Interpreter. But
this, like a great many other Amusements, con-
lifts more in Noise and Show than Sense.

But who have we here lifted up by the Spirit?
Tho' I fear 'tis such a kind of Spirit, as set our
Saviour on the top of the Pinacle: A brisk dap-
per Spark, and, if I mistake not, a Taylor; he
might be chose King of the Pigmies, and in a fe-
cond War with the Cranes, might prove as no.
table a Conqueror, as Mons. Boufflers, or any of
the French Bullies and Hedors. A iharp Nose,
a quick Eye, a high.Forhead, meagre Looks, a
fbrill Voice, and a voluble Tongue, diftinguilh
him. He'll out-talk a Frenchwoman, and out-
blunder an Irilnman, or Teaguelander's Under-
standing; Scots Honesty; a Dutchman's Tempe-
rance; an Ita!an's Chastity, are his peculiar
Qualifications; yet he's as Solemn on the firJf
day, and speaks as often as an old Midwife at a
Chriftning. But, like a Cracker, he makes a
Noie and splutters a little while, then with a
Bounce finks and goes out.

But wh;at have we here, old Mother Shipton,
of the second Edition with Amendments? A
close black Hood, over a pinch'd Coif, a little
]0o wrinkled Forhead, so deeply plough'd with
Age, that the Furrows, if plac'd beneath her
Eyes and Nose as above them, would be very
convenient Conveyances, for the Liquids that
continually flow from her blear Eyes and drop-
ping Nostrils i which with her hollow Cheeks,
pale fallow Complexion; Nut-cracker Chin, that
almost meets her Nose Paralitick Motion of
the Head, which keeps.pace with her Tongue,
and gives much advantage to the fiivering of the
Spirit, makes a compleat She-P;'eacber, fit to de-

nounce

nounce Hell and the Devil, but for Joys, and
Rewards, and the like, she looks them out of
Countenance. Nay, fays my Indian Friend, if
the Womens Tongues, begin to run, 'tis time for
us to seek another Amusement.

I took him at his word, and quitted this House
of Dagon, where a Poet can have no more to do
than a Painter, we jogg'd on to our next Adven-
ture; only by the way, I ventur'd to draw this
Chara&er of the Se&.

They would be thought the only People of God;
tho' their chief Motive to that impudent Ambi-
tion, is, that they may claim the Right of pilla-
ging and chehtino all the World besides, as 'Egy-
ptians. They are a fort of Yews, and not only
trade and fornicate among themselves, but many.
likewise in their own Tribe: But I beg your par-
don for talking of Matrimony; theirs is only
Whoring with a Witness, while the whole Con-
gregation set their Hands to the Bargain. They
won't swear, because they may chance to pay for
that; but they will lie confoundedly, because
they may chance to get by that. A long Cra-
vat or Wig in a Man, or high Topping and Lace in
a Woman, they abominate, as Ensigns of Vanity,
but they will wear the best Favours and richest
Silks, use the Leather Convenience, and be prou-
deft in their Plainness, than the haughtieft Lady
at Court in her Embroideries and Jewels. Their
Religion indeed seems chiefly in their Cloaths,
and so they have more need of Taylors than Teach-
ers. For, They are a Congregation without Teach-
ers a Church without Sacraments; a Religion vi;th-
cut Worflsip ; Formality without Mfeaning; Men nlth-
out Manners, and ChrliJians without Bafritfm,

B b1 h

T'he Bawdy-House.
IT is an old and approv'd Observation of those

jolly Fellows who spend much time in the
Contemplation of Bacchus, and are acquainted
with the laudable Records of the Bottle, that ge-
nerally in Discourse after Religion comes Bawdry;
and so it happens here: For after. so large an
Amusement of the Spirit, we accidentally tumbl'd
into an Amusement of the Flefll; for palling from
these Spiritual Barody-Houfes, betray'd by the Hy.
pocritical Sign of a Coffee-House, we fell into a
Carnal one.

The tEgyptians, who were the first Authors of
Human Religions, never fuffer'd any one to be
made a Priest, till he were initiated in the Rites
of Priapis: And the Roman Church will admit no
Pope, till the Porphyry-Chair has confirm'd his
Manhood; so great an Affinity have the Ancient
and MIoderna Idolaters made betwixt the Pulpit
and the Brothel. In other Countries, nearest
the chief Churches and topping Monaiteries,you
find Eftablifh'd Bawdy- Hofets; and in the very
Seat of St. Peter, we know 'em settl'd by Au-
thority of State; the fame is done in the Po-
litick State of enice, the Arbitrary State of Flo-
rence, and almost all Towns and Cities of Ital:
But here, under the purer State of Reformation,
Bawdy-houses are fain to go in Disguise- Cossie
and Te , to be fld, or fin Sp.aiflJ Chocolate invite
you in, when in reality they fell only Ratifi,
Roft Solis, Geneva, and such odd forts of Liquor,
,t to enfiame the Reckoning and fire the Blood
while the Sec'et Commodities of the Place, are rea-
dy ir ti;e Warehoifes, to cool one Inflammation
nr.d ,ivc a grcater like true Tinkers, Itopping
j,:.' - ,':l i erettle to mk
to wo, Bec

fell into one of thefeReceptacles of Sinners, with
a design to drink a Dilh of Bohea, or Coffee, or at
most not to exceed the Debauch of a Pennyworth
of cold Nants. We were no sooner entred, but
such a Tun of Female Fat saluted us, that the
very Sight was an Amnufement. The Reverend
Matron of the Place saluted us very civilly, tho'
with this very odd Appearance: Her Face was
broader than the Full Moon, and as fhning;
but it was with Sweat or Pomatum, not Light;
her grey, or rather flver Locks, were cover'd most
curiously with Powder, whose straggling Hairs
reach'd almost down to her Eye-brows; some-
thing of a Forehead there was,but all'drawn over
with the Footfieps of Wrinkles, which the Fat
had driven thence, and so they look'd like seams
of Wounds, which, mingl'd with the Pockholes,
made'an agreeable Mixture all over her Face;
which, with those, and the large Scars, was
made incapable of being clean, so that the Dirt,
and fallow Complexion, gave her a Phiz mobt
furprizing; her Neck look'd like Rolls ofcollar'd
Pig, and her Bubbies, like a Quagmire, ready to
o'er-run the Brink, or like a Hafty-Pudding o'er-
looking the Dish; an Ell and three quarters
could not measure her from fide to fide, and-- he
was no longer from Head to Foot, than from Hip
to Hip; Ihe was Spherical, like a Globe; but L
mult needs fay, very complaisant.
My Indian Itarts back, as if he had met with a
Rattle-Snake, or some other noxious Animal,
dangerous to Human Life; and indeed, he was
not much mistaken, the Stings {he produces being
almolt as fatal. We ask'd for a Dish of Bohea,
the reply'd, the had none; we then defir'd a Dish
of Coffee, that was a'Pagan Liquor, and not to be
admitted within her Dominion. We then defir'd

some
The Bawdy-House.,

25

some true Nants; that was a French Commodity,
and the was not for incouraging the Manufa&ure
of an Enemies Country. But if we would please
to fit down, she had good Rofafolis, Ratafia, Mead
Syder, Geneva, or Wine The could help us to if we
requir'd it. Enquiring if the dealt in no other
Liquors, she gave a stamp with her Foot, and up
came one ten times uglier than fhe-Run, cries
the, fetch Betty Tomfon hither presently, and her
Bedfellow with her-Repeating our demand,not
minding what she said to her FemaleMercury, she
reply'd, That she had sent out for as good as any
this noble City afforded, Pretty, Plump, Sound,
Eafie, Gay, and a thousand Qualities which most
Trades give to Commodities they have a mind
to dispose of. I ihould think, fays I to my In-
dian, we are unawares fallen into a Bawdy-houfr,
were there not so many Memento's of Mortality
here, as are fuflicient to banilh Letchery from the
most Vigorous. But however this is likewise an
Amuferent, and therefore give us a Quartern of
Gin. Down we fate, the Quartern was soon eva-
cuated, another fill'd without calling for, and
another, when enter two tawdry Whores, brisk,
-gay and awkard, with sickly smiling Counte-
nances,'flatternly Dress, anddirty Shoes. The
Familiar Doxies threw themselves immediately
each in one of our Laps, Hands about our Necks,
and Lips to Lips, before we knew where we were.
And if they had not given this Alarm, other
Parts had been invaded before we could be on the
Defensive. My -Dear, flia'nt we have a Ouartern
,f Ratafia ? fays one: AMy pretty Rogue, Jha'nt we
have a Betty of Wine ? fays t'other.

But the Bawd finding we did not like the
Ladies, tip'd them the Wink, and sent her grisly

cfl'enger for others of the fame Gang: Ex-
.ii-" hc" self, that the damn'd Jades had been

Drunk

Drunk all Night, and not fit for Company, but
alIr'd us, that the Black one had been a cele-
brated Beauty, a Parson's Daughter, and a Tay-
lor's Wife, but was debauch'd by a young Ensign
of the Guards, who leaving her, she was expos'd
to the Town, but not above half a Year; when
the Whore had pass'd all her Degrees this seven.
Years, and was ready to commence Bawd the firit
Coffee-house that was empty, and the first Cull
the could get, to furnish her with Tables C hairs,
and one Table-Bed, and two Quartan Pots, and
about half a Crowns worth of the infernal Li-
quors they deal in.
What place, fays my Indian, is this you have
brought me to ? Is it another. Bedlam ? All the
People I have seen lately are mad, some one way,
some another, every House has its peculiar
Frenzy. True, said I, for the Bedlam you saw
in Moorfields, is but the Representative Epitome
of this Town; for we are all Mad, tho'in diffe-
rent manners: But as to this place, I must tell
you, it is the Pi&ure of one of the very celebrated
parts of Hell; the great awkard Lady of this
place is call'd a Bawd, who is generally a worn-
out Whore of twenty or thirty Years standing,
and lhe deals in Damnation, and so is truly a
Facor for the Devil. This is the Place of Battle,
whereas the Meetings we saw is only the Place of
Cballene ; There the People meet, and agree the
Bargain, here they put it in Execution; the
Bawd, like the Hangman and Physician, lives by
the Sins of the People. Tho' she has generally
7he Prasice of Piety in her Window, yet she knows
of no Religion but short Quartans, and eafie Bub-
bles; and as she thinks little of Heaven, so ihe
dreads no Hell, like Julfice - , the Beadle, or
an Inffrmer. She is the Informer's Slave, the Whores
Tyrant, the Tally-man's EJtate, the Surgeon's Bene-

faaor,

facEor, the Shipwreck of City Prentices, the Favouiiti
of Lords and Courtiers, and the Abhorrence of all ood
AMen.

While I was making this Harangue, two jolly
Bona Robas flip in, and march diredly up Stairs
the Bawd after them, and the Messenger all in a
streaking Sweat down the Stairs into the Sodo.
mite Cellar. M.adam soon comes down Stairs
puts on a thousand awkard Grimaces of good
Humour, and Vows, because we look'd like Gen.
tlemen, The had prevail'd with two Intimate
Friends of hers, Ladies of Figure, both kept, one
by a rich City Druggist, and the other by a zeal-
ous Saint of-, and that to oblige her only,
they came to her; that lhe doubted not but we
would be generous, and defir'd us to walk up
Stairs. But my Indian and I, Sick of the naufe-
ous Follies of the Place, paid Madam for what
we had drank, and made haste out of her in-
chanted Castle, for.fear of some of her Bravo's
Resentment of our disappointing both the Whores
and the Bawds Expecation.

In the Indies, fays my Indian, it is no Shame
ior the young Women, before their Marriage,
to make use of their own; but then it is not in
this manner traffick'd for by Broakers, and Goers-
eeitreen, who put an Extortion on the Pleasure,
and cheit both the Purchaser and Seller. Are
these Places common ?

Why truly, said I, this Town is pretty well
ftor'd, but much lets than formerly, for lince
Liberty of Conscience, every Meeting-House is
a Rendezvous, and now every Tavern a Bawdy-
house, every Drawer and Porter a Pimp, and the
Whores get more by it, and the Cullies are less
cheated in their Liquors and Prizes. Not but
there are foime Bawds of Figure, which make a
prettv hand of it among the Ladies and Men of

Figure.

Figure. Mrs. .--- has her Visiting Day, where
all Aflignations are manag'd without noise or
notice. My Lady-- has hers to the fame
purpose; and on other days can furnith a con-
venient Apartment for the Lovers to dispute in,
and yet keep their Reputation; for tho' they
are known to live by nothing or little else, yet
the Ladies and Gentlemen of Figure, having
both, one time or other, occasion to make use
of them, they flip over any false Step, that for
want of good Conduct happens to make a Noise,
as when my-- chanc'd to have his Wife dogg'd
to my La- and follow'd her, being acquainted
with the Rooms, tho' aflurd his Wife was not
there, goes up diretly, and finds his Lady in a
very suspicious Posture with---. But the mat-
ter was hush'd up, and the next Viiting Day not
a Person thinner than usual.
There are Places of Reception of better Figure
than the Quarters we fell into, where you may
bring your Lady, and have a Bed and Entertain-
ment from half a Piece to twenty Guinea's, for
some Men are so fond of those Amusements, that
they spare no Colt to advance them.
Upon Old Man's, and Young Man's,

Coffee-Houses.
\/Y Friendly American, and your humble
I Servant, having left Temple-Bar to Weft
and be South, we bore away dire&ly for the Pa-
lace of St. :ames's; but happening to encounter
the Church of St. Clement-Danes by the way, the
numerous Beauties that throng'd thither, put my
Companion in an excellent Humour; he de-

manded

manded of me with a pleasant Impatience, What
Place that might be which entertain'd such good
Company? I told him, 'twas a Struture Sacred
to the Majesty of Heaven. He reply'd very
smartly, That he thought it Heaven it self, since
so many Angels attended there, and blefs'd it
with their presence. I fmil'd at his Notion, but
defird him not to be too rash in his Opinion;
for those very Numerical Ladies, that were the
Objeacs of his Pleasure, had not half so much of
Saints in their Confiitution, as he imagin'd. Ob.
serve, fays I, giving him no time to make answer,
There Serjeant Blunder's Lady in the Gallery,
who never was civil to her Husband,or difobliging
to any body else; my Lord Dorset certainly drew
this Lady's Piture, when he exprefs'd himself to
this purpose;

Nature in Pity to our Pain,

And Trith design to ease -t,
Hm to her boundless Beauty joyn'd

A boundless Will to please as.
This discerning Fair one, continues I, knows
the Complexion, Age and Country, of a young
Fellow in the dark by the Touch, as well as her
Husband diftinguiihes Mutton by the Taste, tho'
he has been Man and Boy this Forty Year a Mem-
ber of the Honourable Society. There's Madam
Flexible too, a great Railer at the Times; he
heartily laments so much Christian Blood ftould
be lhed abroad, when {he knows how to dispose
of it to a much better Purpose at home. Ofall
the Produss of your Country, ihe likes Chocolate
the best, because 'tis Indulgent to Lovers: Of al
Vertues the declares for Charity, but the Young
and Handfom are the only Subje&s of her Coml
panfion; and mhe never maintains any Persons in

Idlenefó,

Idleness, such only who can work very vigorously
are sensible of her Magnificence. In short, Her
Husband would have been as Rich as any Gentle-
man of the Long Robe, if this Itch of Liberality
had not asseted his dear Partner. Tho' after all,
some Persons think it very reasonable, that what
one got by his Head, the other should spend by
her Tail.

Their Care and Pains the Fair-ones do befiow,
Not to please Gods above, but Alan below;
Who thinks them Saints, are damnably mistook,
They're only Saints and Angels in their look.
The Spirit of Poetry had took Poffefion of me,
and without giving my Friend and Fellow-Tra-
veller the opportunity of Interfering, I proceeded,

The Ladies here, their Lovers Hearts,

By their Devotion, win;
Tho' all is Rock and Stone without,

Yet all is soft writhn.
The Character given of these Fair Hypocrites,
frighten'd my Sun-burnt Innocence, and he tum-
bled down the Itately Portico, as nimbly as a
Woman of the Town jumps into a Hackney-
Coach. 1 ftretch'd my self a little to recover the
Fugitive, and having reduced him to Reason, we
continued our Journey very lovingly together;
the rattling of Coaches, the Spatioufiefs of t-.e
Road, the Pertness of the Company we met with
upon the way, the magnificent Equipages, the
Richness of the Garniture, and the Pleasure that
appear'd in every Bodies Face; put me into the
fame fort of Chagrin that perplex'd my SpaniJh
Friend and old Acquaintance Don Quevedo; the
Humour took me in the Head that I was direAly
bound for the Devil; That this broad and open

way

way was the Road of Perdition; And those little
blind Alleys I pass'd by, were the Defiles that
lead to Paradise. I had read that Ingenious Au-
thor a little before, and his diverting Notions
had made a very deep Impreflion upon my Judg-
ment, my Melancholly and some malicious Va-
pours agreed to render me Whimsical: Under
these dreadful Apprehensions I trudg'd on a pretty
way, without communicating my Thoughts to my
swarthy Attendant, that was to come in for his
thare of the Adventure. But of a sudden, spying
the Reverend Dr. Fr- n, Successor of the Elo-
quent Bishop Patrick, walking very gracefully be-
fore me; Oh thinks I to my self, 'tis well enough,
'tis morally impossible for me to be in the Paths
that descend to the Gates of Deftruaion, since
that venerable Orthodox and worthy Divine
takes the fame Road, and Steers in the fame Lati-
tude; his Charity is conspicuous, his Piety noto-
rious, and his Conversation humble: He Pra-
tices the Aufterities, Hardihips and Penance, of
an Anchorite; He denies himself the good Things
of this World; He is refolv'd that he and his
House will serve the Lord; Fasting and Prayers
are the great Duties of Religion, and he and his
effectually perform these Duties: He Prays and
his Family Fasts, and betwixt the Reverend Seer
and the Sons of the Prophet, they exactly com-
ply with the Letter and Intention of the Text.
I had no sooner hit upon this Notion, but my
Senses clear'd up, and I was as gay as a Priest
that hath satisfied his Revenge; we immediately
found our selves near the Statue on Horseback
of the late Royal Martyr, I pull'd off my Hat as
I pass'd by the Image of Injur'd Majesty, when
an old Acquaintance of mine, whose Family had
severely fuffer'd in our' late unhappy Dissentions,
accosted me, and was very Inquisitive to know

the

the Cause of that unusual A&ion. -He tdld me,
if I defign'd some Ecclesiastical Prefernrent by
that piece of CQndefcention, I was very much
mistaken; That it was as hard to obtain a Comn-
mission to ad in the Church, as in the Army,
unless the Ready prepar'd the way; That paying
my Refpea to the Statue of that departed Mo-
narch, was to as little purpose, as Diogenes beg-
ging of a Statue; That it was well for the Reve-
rend tuft it self, that it flood in the Sacred Limits
of the Verge, otherwise the Creditors of the Soii
might have made bold with the Father in Ex-
ecution. As I was attentive to this Discourse,
a Rascally Slave of a Chair-man takes me upon
the North fide of my outward Man with one of
the Poles of his leathern Conveniency, and after-
wards cautiously bawls out with a surly Tone,
Byyour leave, Sir. Not at all pleas'd with this
Conmplement, and desiring no more of his Civi-
lities, I brufh'd off as fast as I could, when Toung
MA.n's Coffee-House threw it self. in my way, and
very kindly 6ffer'd its Protetion. I acquiesced
there, knowing my self secure from more Dan-
gers than one, and immediately upon my en-
trance mounted the Stairs, and.mingled my Per-
son with the Knights of the Round Table, who
hazard three Months Revenue at a single Cast;
and run the Rifque whether they thall be Luxu-
rious one Week, or starve in a Garret for a dozen.
Their Weapons, if not themselves, were much
ancienter than the Institutions of King Arthur y
we read of Chefs invented by Palamedes at the
Siege of Troy; and without dispute Dice ow'd
their Extra&ion to a more veterane Original, for
'tis very credible the Prince of the Air might be
the ingenious Author of these Moveaples, and
imparted the Invention to divert his Profelites,
heji the Fumes of Melancholy or Wine set them

C c c c

on the Stool of Repentance. From these Inflances
'tis evident, that Gaming . of venerable Anti-
quity, tho' the modern way of praEifing it is a
little unaccountable; We were scarce enter'd the
Room, when a volly of Oaths saluted us; one
blafphem'd Heaven, but this was a little French
Lieutenant, who had the ill Fortune to lose his
own Money, and the private Colletion made by
some charitable Persons for the Relief of the Bre-
thren Another curs'd hinfelf, and a third his
Wife, who, it seems, had intreated him notto
play that Morning: The second of these Gentle-
men was much in the wrong, and the last can as
little be justified, for 'twas damnably unreason-
able in the Husband, to give his Wife to the
Devil, who has used all her utmost Endeavours to
fend him to Heaven.

These furprizing Entertainments bred such Con-
fusions in my Stranger, that sometimes he imagin'd
'twas his ill luck to have hit upon a Rendezvous of
Madmen; at other moments he was perfwaded to
believe that he had mistook his way, and fallen into
the bottomless Pit: The small Experience he hadin
the World aifted to amuse him; and he could not
imagine but thisHoufe ofCurfes, Imprecations and
Gnalhing of Teeth, could be any other than some
Parlour or Drawing-Room belonging to his In-
fernal Majesty. I guefs'd at his Disease, by the
change of his Complexion; and to convince him
of his Error, acquainted him that there were
Military Men, who got their Money easily, and
parted from it with as great freedom. Upon this
he very gravely enquir'd, What I meant by Mili-
tary-Men? And what Profession those Gentle-
men were of? I reply'd, by Military-MIen, I meant
Soldiers canton'd into several Troops and Com-
panies, consisting of several Individual Persons,
kept constantly in Bay by the State; to be useful

in

in A&ion, and burthenfome in Peace; to meet
with Applauses upon view of Danger, andAffronts
when the Consternation is over. In brief, i in-
tended Men whose business was fighting in bad
Times, and who had leisure to starve in Good;
or take a Turn to the Wteft-lndies to find them
Employment, and Season them, by change of
Climate, against .another Occasion. My Ame-
rican reply'd, He did not doubt their Courage,
and muff needs be of Opinion, that those Gen-
tlemen, as I cali'd them, must of consequence be
free enough of their Persons, who were so pro-
digal of their Souls; (For my Spark, you muff
underlfand, had made shift to learn something
from his Marine Chaplain by the way, besides
the Art ofcompofing a Bowl of Punch.) But
*pray, fays my Friend, are not these well-drefs'd
Gentlemen, who make so good an Appearance,
very rich ? I let him know 'twas an Argument
he understood Mankind very little, when he
drew Inferences from their Dress; That the
Soldiers, in opposition to the Tradesmen (who
generally provides the Ready for his Holy-day
Cloaths) is always poorest when he makes the
best show, what they wear outwardly, they want
in Linings. And if his Curiosity induc'd him to
know the Exposition of the Riddle, he might
enquire at the'Horfe-Guards, the Agent's Office,
or of the Under'akers for the Army. Tired with
these Scenes of Fblly and Extravag^;ce, we con-
vey'd our selves down Stairs, in order to find
something more entertaining; the Company was
numerous, and conrfted of as much diversity,
and as many Humours, as the Calfs-Head-Club;
some were reading News, others difcourting Po.
liticks, and a third fort of People Smeckig
Tobacco: At the upper end of a long Table,
fat a little diminutiveGentleman, to whom feve-

Ccc 2 ral

ral Persons, in much better Habit, and more re-
fembling the Divine Image than himself, paid a
great deal of Refpef. Bless me, fays I, what
have we got here, the natural Iffte of some Insolent
Dame, who doted on a Baboon, and entertain'd her
flff wirh the Caresses of that agreeable Animal ? Here
the Whirl-pool of Poetry fuck'd me in, and I
fell a Rhyming without farther Ceremony.

F;nd Israel after Brazen Idols whor'd,
Egyptian MIeroe a Cat ador'd
Fifties and Dogs her Imipioxs Zeal implor'd.
Io Superstition, sur'ely, cou'd allow
Refpet to thee, and none but we cou'd bow
7'o ftch a brazen peevifji Cur ,M thou.
When ever Deformity has a mind to expose
her self undrefs'd, she needs no other ill Figure
to appear in; Providence consulted for the good
of Mankind, when so treacherors a Soul was per-
mitted to infuse it self in so crooked a Receptacle;
for had his Person been agreeable, and not ob-
rtruned the Infidelities of his mind, he might
have ruin'd more .Honest Fellows in Red, than
the Payment of their Debts, a long and lazy Peace,
or a Disbanding Parliamcnt. I exprefs'd my self
a little louder than was necessary, and being
taken notice of by some that fat next me, I re-
folv'd to be no more a Martyr to my Chiiming,
thian a Ir at tl'ills would be to his Religion: So
briefly depoCte4l my Copper at the Bar, whilst
Mrs. Af.in was pledging an .;si Colonel in Vfque-
'.?iar, and vanifh'd out of the Coffee-Room, as
quick as an enchanted'Supper flies froc a Saucy
Clerk, that has the ill Mlanners to fay Grace to
ic. As I was crossing the way to wait upon a
Person of Qt:'t,7 at Old Man's, my Fellow Tra-
veller accosted me very gravely; That a Soldiers

way

way of Life was unaccountable; That he had
heard among the Priests of his owi Country,
there were two Eternal Beings opposite in their
Nature, and vastly different in their Qualities
and Attributes; The one Indulgent and Mercitul,
repleat with infinite Wisdom and Goodness;
The other of a Disposition Cruej, Malicious and
Revengeful; That he could not but imagine, if
there were any Truth in these Traditions, that
the Military Orders proceeded from the btlacI
and ill-nattr'd Deity, which for fear is worfhip'd
by his Superstitious Country-men. He added, It
feem'dlinconfitent with the Design of the Crea-
tion, that one part of it should be bred qp ill
Blood, train'd and educated to destroy the other,
and make havock of the noblest of all Sublunary
Beings. I could not but be pleas'd with his Theo:
logy, yet told him, those formidable Fellow.s
(pointing at the Double Creatures over the w'ay)
drefs'd with all the Equipage of Murder, were
not half so good at Execution, as the GenZriemer
of the Collede; That the found of the Mortars
in an Apothecary's Shop, was a sure Presage of
a Funeral, as a Pajfin;-.Bell in the Times of Super-
ftition and Ignorance: That some Ph:lofopbjical
lnquiftions, after the Cause and Cure of Diseases,
by a tingle Member of a Wortby and 7udicious
Society, had difinifs'd 'a greater number of
Wretches from the AffliAions of this miserable
World in a Tear, than e'er a hoary-headed Red-
coat in all the Rencounters of his Life. \We
pop'd into Old Man's just as I had ended my Mo-
rality, where the Agreeableness of the Company,
the Magnificence of their Dress, and the Cere-
mony that was used on all cccafions, entertain'd
my Fellow-Traveller with very diverting Idca's:
he obferv'd the word Honour to be mix'd in ail
their solemn AlTertions, and softly demanded

CcC c 3 t'a

what God that might be, whose Name was men-
tion'd with such a Religious Deference ? Honour,
I return'd, was a Deity which only Ladies and
Gentlemen paid their Refpeas to; The one when
they facrific'd their Pleafiure to their Fame;
And the other, when in ridiculous Duels they ven-
tur'd Life to maintain a Barren Reputation. Tis
true, almost all Orders and Diftin&ions of Men,
pretend a Reverence for this Whimsical Fantome,
which exists only in Imagination: But to give
you a clearer N6tion, how far their Ations are
agreeable to their Words, I believe we 'have no
more to do. than to reflea upon what those Gen-
tlemen in the corner are a doing; We obferv'd
there a Colonel and his Agent, upon whom a
pretty brisk Youth of about Seventeen attended
at three or four Yards distance in the Rear, and
made his Honours upon every occasion, we hap-
pen'd to place our selves very near, and imme-
diately exprefs'd himself as follows.

This young Gentleman has a particular Regard for
your Honour, and a desire to learn the Art of War
under so experienc'd an Officer; 'tis true, he can't
boast any Antiquity of Blood or Service in the Army,
to recommend / im to so considerable a Pojt, as that
of Enrign troyor Honour. But, Sir, he has deposited
a Hundred Guinea-s in the Hands of Sir Francis
Child, rhicl.h I prefirme, vill plead his Merit very
,reigtily - betides an Acknopledgment to your humble
-Servant. The Favour was granted, and the young
Beau difmifs'd to his fatisfadion. My Indian
flung out of the Room in a Passion, for by this
time he understood something of these Military
Intrigues, and wonder'd how Mankind could be
so insensible as to pay for Ruin; he affirm'd that
Blood and Money was too much; that he had
often heard of Persons willing to buy Life, even
wtith the basels Articles, but never knew of any

so

so mad before, to purchase Death upon the loweif
Consideration.

By this time we were come to the ;Admirdaty
ffice, the outside invited us in,. but here we
found only a company of Tarrs walking to and
fro'with their Hands in their Pockets, as on the
Quarter-Deck aboard; in one Room there was
a company of Lieutenants,f'me-htadferv'd twenty
Years without being rais'd, because they either
knew not how to Bribe in the right place, or
were so tenacious of what they had so hardly
purchas'd, that their only hopes were now Half
Pay, or Superanuation. In another place were Sea-
mens Wives with Petitions, and pressing Deputy
S--, who was as surly to them, as a true
Whigg in Office; but tho' he demanded no Fee,
he could be mollify'd by a little Fellow-feeling, that
like a Sop to Cerberus, let Petitions and Men pass
too; Then you fall in betwixt S&yll and Cha-
ribdis, the Clerks on one fide, and Sea-Captains
on the other; where. Cowards that have loft
one Ship, easily get another; and Men of Valour,
without Interest, wait in vain for Preferment,
from those who dispose of what they do not un-
derftand; for here the Land determines of the
Main, and he that 'never fee the North-Foreland,
disposes of things, as if he knew all the Creeks
and Bays, Shelves, Sands, and Nations of the
Universe.

But Mum's the Word-for who wou'd speak
their Mind among Tarrs and Commilfioners,
for the cracking their Shell, is too hard an Amuse-
ment for my Teeth ? So my Indian and I pass'd
halltily out, and made our way over the Parade
towards Westminster; when we had pass'd the
Horfe-guards, and enter'd the odoriferous Park
of St. yames's, we found it a Hia-Chanlge on the
Parade, Red Coats and Laced Hats spread every

C c c4 where;

where, and Faces that breath'd Fire and Blood
were all about us; some were eager, and walk'd
faIt; others were grave, and look'd as if they
thought. Here is decided the Price of Commis.
sions, which are openly bought and fold, as if a
lawful Merchandize. Here Sieges are form'd,
rattles fought, Vidories won. Here Irijh, Scots
and EnglifJ meet very amicably, make a buz, and
contend in Nofenfe: Here you may hear all this
General's Miscarriages fully accounted for; that
Generals Success magnify'd and defcrib'd ; that
Colonel damn'd for being put over this Captain's
Head; that Agent curs'd for tricking the Regi-
ment out of their Pay, or by railing such Con-
tributions with the Colonel's Connivance, that
Estates are now got at this end of the Town, 'as
well as by Stock-jobbing in the City. Here ho-
nest Pain, and- Potter, and divers others of that
Fraternity, take their mid-days Perambulation,
to agree with the Spendthrift Officers, for ad-
vancing their Money at 30 per Cent. Here walks
a tall wrijimna, with abundance of thoughtful
Gravity in his Face; who had spent his Estate,
and now lives on Women; and what is more
prepolterous, sets up for a Icr, the oddest Am-
bition that ever was in Nature; for Wit was ne-
ver yet the Growth of that Country.

We as naturally went from Man's Coffee-loufe,
to the Parade, as a Coachman drives from Lock-
er's to the Ply)'houfe. Tho' the Scene was chan-
ged, the Adors were the the fame as to their
PrCfti jn but infinitely different in their Chara-
-'er, Degrees and Circunvfrances. The' first Gen-
tleman I happen'd to cast my Eyes upon; was my
old Friend and Fellow-Collegian honest Bartho-
iom.w Cringe. I wonder'd who in the Devils
Name had equipt him with a Wig large enough
tr 'load a Cnamel. If Nature had indulg'd our

-., Pri-

St. James's Park. 41
primitive Parents with such an extraordinary
producion, they would have had little reason to
have blufh'd at, or been alham'd of their Naked-
ness. And the Original of that virtuous ProfefJion
Aantua-making,our good Grandmother Eve might
have fav'd her self a great deal of trouble in
tacking together her Primitive Green Petticoat and
Waftcoat. His Sword in length resembled a Foot-
mans, who alferts the Reputation of his Miftrifs,
which, for divers good Causes and Reasons, he
is very nearly concern'd in. His Coat was as
blue as the Sky; and his Hat boldly ereced its
Sable Penthouse, to play with greater vivacity
the ruddy Complexion of its Owner. I confider-
ed him with the ftrideft Attention, and could
hardly give Credit to the Informers of my Mind,
when my Spark, to end the Amusement, accosted
me in a very obliging manner. Says he, Dear
Friend Tom, you're furpriz'd to find your old
Friend in this Place and Habit. I wear this,
Dress and Garniture, as the Emblems of my
Militant Capacity. I have the Honour to per-
form the Duties of my Office under the Prote-
Aion of that worthy Gentleman Lieutenant-Ge-
neral --- in Quality of Chaplain to his Regi-
ment of Horse; and faith, dear Tom, to be plain
with you, I was looking for such a pleasant Com-
panion as your self, to whom a Man might un-
bosom a few Secrets, which are a little hard of
Digeltion. We've had many a smart Touch to-
gether and to deal sincerely, what betwixt my
Kefpets to his Excellency, and some neceflhry
Pun&ilios to the Cafrock, I am become as Me-
lancholy as a Statesman debarr'd from doing
Mischief, or a Bawd in Briderwel. If you'll do
me the favour to contribute your Affiftafice in
order to expel these Splenetick Vapours, your
old Acquaintance, a Bit to eat, and a Bottle of

Wine

Wine expe& you at Shuttleworrh's, where I know
you have Courage enough to come, tho' the De.
vil appears upon the Sign-pofl. I told him, I
kifs'd his Hands with all imaginable Refpea;
that I would not fail to oblige my self and him
with the Interview he propos'd, as soon as I had
treated my Sun-burnt Friend with a view of some
Rarities in the Park, who I defign'd, with his
good leave, ihould liare-in the Entertainment,
We immediately parted; the Canonical Cavalier
to the Tavern, and my American Pupil, with his
Inftru&or, towards the Canal, where once the
Centinels and Gladiator, with equal concern,
guarded her Majesty's Subjecs of the Feather'd
Generation.

I was as gay and plealant, in expecation of
the promis'd Regalement,as that Reverend Judge
Don Sancho would have been after a plentiful
Collation. I met with several Amusements, da-
ring three or four Turns I made, that augment.
ed the Pleasure which pofeft me. My Fellow.
Traveller demanded, What Officer that might
be, who was so kind to desire our Company at
Dinner? An Officer, quoth ! not a jot of an
Officer, or a Soldier, that I know of: He is in-
deed a fort of an Eccleflafrical-Drum-Major, that
balls the Military Herd to Battel. Pennance or
Fafling, when the General thinks convenient to
fght, or the want of Provifions,makes an Humi-
liation important or necessary. Indeed, to do
the Man justice, he does not much delight in
Falfing; he looks upon that as a Qualification
fitter for a Bishop, such as the Rev. Dr. K--n,
than the Chaplain of a Regiment, who ought in
Conscience to give a good Example to the Sol-
diers. Turning about to fee what a Clock'twas,
in order to make good my Assignation, I had al-
most tumbl'd over a young Gentlewoman, who

was

vas marching off the Parade with a Colonel, the
Surgeon of his Battalion follow'd close in the
Rear, who was ready to give an Authentick
Certificate, to all whom it might concern, of her
Ladyship's being in good Health, and that his
Honour had no more reason to apprehend any
danger of Fire from her, than he had formerly
from the Combatants of Steinirktor Landen; who
being a quarrelsome fort of People, this Gentle-
man moft'cautioufly avoided their Conversation,
and always had the good Fortune to be Sick, or
in Garrison, at the Critical time of any dange-
rous Rencounter. But whatever Obje&ions the
Malicious might raise agaiift his Courage, he
had the good Fortune of shewing his Manhood
to the Ladies; and without dispute, he was in-
finitely in the right on't, since the Work of Ge-
neration is much more glorious than that of Pri-
vation, extinguilhing Life, or honourable Mur-
der. My Indian Friend ask'd me, Whether this
was not another Exchange ? The Question was
to the purpose, and I frankly return'd, The Pa-
rade might be properly call'd an Exchange, or
a Market; for every thing here was Venal
ready Money, or a handfom Sifter were never-
failing Presents, if a Man had an intent to pur-
chafe a Commission. That good Friends and a
large Stock of Afiurance, sometimes admitted
the Soldier to Preferment; but Courage, long
Service, or true Merit, very rarely. The Co-
lonel here fells his Honour, the Agent his Con-
science, and every thing bears a Price but Vir-
tue. Should the God of War serve under these
Gentlemen, I question whether he would arrive
to the Dignity of a Serjeant, unless his Mistress
the Qyeen of Love, or the more prevailing Piaure
of her Majesty, introduc'd him. Observe that
little Gentleman upon the right hand; his Buli-

ness

ness is to state Accounts of the Army; land it
turns very well to his own: If a young Widow
wants the Arrears of her Husband, and ima.
gines, in refpeft to the Dead, or compaflion to
the Living, she shall be honourably dealt with,
such Person will find themselves damnably mi-
flaken: No, there's another way to go to work;
the Lady must take a Tour as far as Knigbtsbridg
or Kensington, stop may be at the Worlds-End, or
the Sian; offer my Spark a small Treat, when
upon examining her Affairs at Night, 'tis a hun.
dred to one but he does her Business in the Morn-
ing. Tho' my Stomach gave me warning, I
trefpafs'd upon good Manners, in permitting my
Friend to be so long alone, or entertain'd with
no better Company than what the Mistress of
the Hospitable Tenement where he relided could
afford him- Yet before I repair'd to my Fellow-
Collegian, I could not forbear making this Po-
etical Refledion.

The Colonels here in solemn manner meet, t
lVot with a fell design the French to beat,
But to confidt where they may nicely eat.
IWat Trufliing Mortal Jells the noblest Wine,
tWhere, free from Duns, they may securely dine
We walk'd thro' the Horfe-Guards; I call'd
to mind the Happiness of those serene times,
when the Troops of the Houfhold, initead of be-
ing traufported to Foreign Countries, guarded
the Royal Poultry with great Care and Applica-
tion. When there generous Knight-Errants
presided over the Converse of sighing Lovers,
and proteded their Nocturnal Amours from Vi-
olence and Injuries. This was the Golden Age,
unless preceeding Aira claim that Venerable
Title, when even the Guards themselves were

unU

unknown unthought of when Majesty had no
other Defence, than the Love and Piety of their
Subjeds.
Tyrant and Traytor then were Names unknown,
Nor Guards fecur'd, nor Fears difturb'd a Throne.
Then Kings enjoy'd a long and happy Reign,
And slept as quiet as the meanest Swain :
Honour d and old to Death did gently bend,
And without Blood to Proserpine descend.
This Martial Amusement did not long detain
us, but we past through, and made our way for
the Abby of WefJminfter; where we taking a soli-
tary. walk, my Indian feem'd pleas'd with the So-
lemnity of the Place; which itruck a fort of fa-
cred Horror into us, and infpir'd an unsought
Devotion to the Deity it was ere&ed to.

vWelSmiunter Abby.
IT not being Prayer-time, we amus'd our selves
[ with viewing the glorious Circumstances of
the Dead , on which my Indian Friend made
many Moral Refledions; as on the foolish Va-
nity of Men, in extending their Folly beyond
this Life. Pride, that was their Vice while liv-
ing, will not forsake them in the Grave, they
making that the lasting Monument of it. Flat-
tering Inscriptions, and Marble Monuments
they have Refuge to, when they want Soul to
recommend themselves to Posterity by their good
and generous Acions. In the North-Ifle we
found a remarkable Instance of Modefly, while
over the Immortal Ben. Johnson, there was only
on a plain little Stone infcrib'd, 0 rare ten.

Johfon :

fohnfon: But whether this were the effec2 of the
Avarice of his Friends, or their Confidence in
his admirable Works, or his own Modesty, I
fiall not determine: Overlooking the other pie-
ces of this Nature on this fide, except that of
Harry Purcell, the Memory of whbfe Harmony
held us a little, we past on to the other fide;
where one thing was remarkable: for, on a Wo-
man's Monument we found an Inscription in
Greek, Hebrew and Arabict; as if by multiplicity
of Figures, they would express the Volubility of
that of the Sex in one: And that of Fairborn in
Engliji, set up by his pious Wife, in order to get
her a second Husband; the Comforts of a fe-
cond Marriage being the surest to a Widow for
the loss of a first Husband. Casting our Eyes
forward, Tom often Thousand intercepts our fight;
a mournful Instance of a Martyr to Love. But
we could not but ftopat the Tomb of a Judge,
his Neighbour, and wonder at his Aflurance, in
telling us of his hopes of a Refurreftion, when
he must pass the fiery Trial of the Judgment
upon it; where he'll fRand as a Culprit, not in
ftatu quo: He had certainly forgot how many bad
Causes he had defended, before he could come to
sleep over the Cause he was to determine; and
how many times he had judg'd by his own Palli-
ons, or Interest, or AffeAions, more than by the
Lar.

The next that drew our Eyes for the Admi-
rablenefs of the Work, as well as the Charader
of the Man, was Dr. Busby of flogging Memory:
His Inscription tells us how many he had bred
to the Bench and the Board; but some have
been apt to think, he had better have employ-
ed his time in teaching them Honefly. and Vn-
deflanding, than Latin and Greek; it had been
better for the State at least, if not for them-

selves.

solves. His Pupils, when they come by, look as
pale as his Marble, in remembrance of his severe
Execution on their Posteriors.
From him we easily pass'd to the Poet's his
Neighbours, and first old Abraham Cowley salutes
us with an Epitaph, and Inscription of equal
Truth, truly poetical indeed, as all Mat. Clifford's
Ficions; for he was no more the Horace, Virgil,
Ovid, &c. of England, than the Monument was
his Grace of Bucks erefing, at least paying for,.
The venerable Chaucer was next, a Poet indeed,
and the Englifi Homer truly; at whose Feet,with.
out any Name, lies Yohn Dryden, his Admirer,
and truly the English Maro. Drayton, with half
a Nose, comes next, admir'd in his Time, but
whose Works are forgot before his Monument is
worn out. The great Spencer keeps the Entry of
the Church, in a plain Stone Tomb, but his
Works are more glorious, than all the Marble
and Brass Monuments within.
To which we now ventur'd to enter, being
first encounter'd by a dapper pert Scoundrel in
a crop-ear'd Wigg, the Parrot of the place, but
a piece of a Weftminfter-Wit, for he throws in his
Joke as formally, and as much to the purpose, as
a Fanatick Holder-forth does his Text.
My Indian Friend was indeed furpriz'd at the
first Apartment of the Dead that we enter'd,
there was something very magnificent and fine
in the Tombs. Here lay a great Minister of
State in a tatter'd Brass Cafe, there the Immor-
tal Talbot; here a Reverend Bilhop underfoot;
there a fine Lady lifted aloft: Here lay the fhat-
ter'd clumfey Figure of a noble Knight, with his
now peaceful Dudgeon at his fide; and there the
Lady who had ;he odd Fate of dying by pricking
her Fore-finger with a Needle: Here a topping
young Hero, like Mars; and there two dimi-
nutive Figures of Princes. But

But to run over the Particulars of all this
Amusement of the Dead, would be too tedious a
Repetition; There was a Conqueror without a
Head; for they were so vile to make that of
Silver, and his Body of Brass, so the Thief iole
the Head, and left the Trunk unattempted.

But we can't leave this venerable Place, with.
out a View of a formidable Sword and Buckler
with which he conquer'd the French; and they
must have been Giants indeed, to have resifted
such formidable Weapons, if his Soldiers fought
with the like. Here was the Pillar of old yacob,
brought to Scotland by Pharaoh's Daughter, with
this Advantage,that where-ever that Stone mhould
go, the Scots should reign. But whether Edward
the First brought it out of Scotland out of Zeal
to Jacob, or to take away the Foes Pdlladium
but here it is, and if you won't believe it, you
had belt dispute with the Parrots of the Place.
But true or false, it has been an Amusement Time
out of mind, and so will continue for all that I
can discover to the contrary.

Edward the Conjfefor's Tomb is the chief piece
of Antiquity, who was the first Royal Empirick
for Scabs and Scrophulous Huinours. He was a
whimsical fort of a Gentleman, that not being
willing or capable to lye with his Wife, was yet
so jealous of her, that he caus'd her to pass the
fiery Tryal of the Ordeal, which she did to the
Satisfacion of the Beholders, but not of the
King, who could never be brought to give her
his Royal Benevolence; for which the Monks
make him a Saints and the Nation was expos'd to
Invasion and Ruin in William the Bastard of Nor-
mandy, whom the Monks call'd in a barbarous.
Latin Conquefror, or Conquer.

From hence we pass'd to another Apartment~
where the noble Earl of Exeter lies cover'd withl

Marble,

Marble, with his own Effigies and his first Wives;
and to {hew that he was not behind-hand in
Love to his Second, he left her a place to lye by
him, when Ihe took her Eternal Nap. But she
being a Person of very nice Taste in the Cere-
monials of Place, chore rather to be alone, than
to lye on his Left Hand.

Hence we'advanc'd into the curious Chappel
of Henry the Seventh, and by the way saw good
Queen Bess, and blefs'd her Pious Memory. Here
we found that cunning Monarch enfhrin'd in
Monumental Brass, which perhaps he got the
Expence of out of Dudley's and Emfon's Estates,
which he had fqueez'd out of the People.
Having some notice beforehand, I -defir'd my
Indian Friend to amuse himself with a view of
the Stalls of the ancient Monks of this Chappel.
Here was inlaid half a dozen jolly Fellows, some
Drunk and Spewing, others Maudlin, some Quar-
relling. There were more numorous Sparks in
the As of Fornication ; other good Friars, Cor
engag'd with their Gampucades, and in every
place their Master, old Lucifer, rejoycing at their
Exploits. My Indian was extreamly amus'd with
the Piety of the Representation. But I saw with
a little Indignation, things too Scandalous for a
Brothel, made free of the Church. And so we
pass'd on to fee the Ruins of Majesty in the
7Women Figures placed there by Authority. As
soon as we had ascended half a score Stone Steps
in a dirty Cobweb hole, and in old Worm-eaten
Presses, whose Doors flew open on our approach,
here flood Edward -the Third, as they told us,
which was a broken piece of Wax-work, 'a bat-
ter'd Head, and a Straw-ftuff'd Body, not one
quarter cover'd with Rags; his beautiful Queen
itood by, not better in Repair; and so to the
number of half a score Kings and Queens, not

D d d near

near so good Figures as the King of the Beggars
make, and all the begging Crew would be afham'd
of their Company. Their Rear was brought up
with good Qr'en Bess, with the Remnants of an
old dirty Ruf, and nothing to cover her Majesty's
Nakedness.

Tir'd with this Amusement, I was enquiring if
there were no Charnel-Houfe to compleat the
View of the Dead. There is no need of that,
fays my Indian, for this place, I think, gives as
melancholy a View of the Dead as that can do;
there the Bones and Skulls seem to want no Gar-
niture, but here we fee Kings, after their Death,
cloath'd like Vagrants; and all their Pomp and
Grandeur confin'd to a Rag and a Cupboard.
And this proves that

Ar mortal thirds are f:bje[l to decay,
And rben Fate furmons, Monarchs must obey.

Upon the Co pters.
Slept as heartily as Innocence it self, when
my Fellow-traveller, who shared in the Ad-
ventures I am going to relate, enter'd my Room,
snd by the Noise and Pains he took to wake me,
difpers'd those agreeable Ideas, Fancy at that
time was entertaining me with:'And instead of
fattering Dreams of Pleasure, which at that in-
ftant obligingly anused me , opening my Eyes,
and colle&ing my Senses, I found -my self no
richer or wiser than I was the precedent Mgrn-
ing: The Bells were ringing in all the Steeples of
the City, and made a noise as harmonious as the
pathetick Harangue of that Vrban Magiltrate a
R-- r, when he delivers himSelf upon some

very

very important Occasion. Having taken a found
Sap, by preparing my Person with the Invinci-
ble Opiates of a Glass of good Wine, and the
Lecure of some Pages in Sir R-- B- re's
Eliza, I thought I had no incumbent Necelfity
upon me to go to Church to hear Dr. T-- n
preach against Avarice, or the Revereqd Master
of the Temple rip open mysterious Points of
Divinity, as plain as he did Dr, Overall's Convo-
cation-Book; And being as little inclin'd to be
merry,or to fee a Harlequin in a Pulpit, I avoided
the Theatre in Rujfel-Court, where more Farces
have been a&ed, than ever appear'd upon the
Stages of Drury-Lane or Dorfet-Garden. Faith,
fays I to my Indian, it Ihall be so, I'll e'n.go shew
you the Tombs. Those of Westminster, fays my
Friend, I am fatisfy'd they are very entertaining,
theDead in thofeVaults sleep very magnificently;
And there's a certain Air of Greatness and Anti-
quity interfpers'd among those venerable Monu-
ments. But pray, continu'd he, What Tombs,
what Monuments do you mean? Said I, with a
Smile, you are infinitely, mistaken, if you con-
elude we have no other remarkable Monuments,
than those of the Plant aenet's, situate in the tenm-
peftuous Air of Weftimiwer; the Tombs of Wood-
fJreet and the Poultry much more deserve your
Consideration, and thither 'tis I design to condut
you.

At this Period I found my self drefs'd, and pri-
vately thank'd Heaven my humble Equipage had
neither brought Ruin or Inconvenience upon any
Family; That the Cloaths I had put on, had not
made me Criminate; That I had hurt no Trades-
man, by obliging him to trust me; Nor increas'd
the Injury, by deluding him into an unnecessary
Attendance. These serious Reflcdions put me
into a fort of a Melancholy, which suggested to

Ddd 2 my

my Fancy, that the Places I was going to were
Real, not Imaginary Tombs or Monuments;
And that as our Chdrch-yards and Burial-places
were attended with Ecclesiastical Officers, as
Clerk, Sexton and Grave-Diggers: So these Burial-
places for-the Living, are as little destitute of
their Chiefs and Assistants, who rake the un-
happy Wretches in the Limits of their Domi-
nions, with a fever Justice than the Infernal
Judges are Fabled by the ancient Grecians, to
have Lorded it in Hell over the dusky Populace
ofStyx and Acheron. The Right Worshipful the
L---d M-- r for the time being supplies the
place of Clerb, the Worlhipful the Sheriffs are the
Sextons, and the Serjeants and Yeomen are the
Grave-diggers; but in the House your Parochial
Pioneer digs up for the Mansions of the moun-
dring Tenants, meet with a serene Quiet, a
long Sensibility from Pain, which those that
are immur'd in this dismal Fastness can never
pretend to; no surly Gaoler disturbs the Dead,
they sleep from Debts, Necessities and Cares;
no gingling Keys break their sacred extended
Slumbers; nor does the saucy Insolence of
villainous Keepers, plag'e-them with Oppreifons
and Injustice.

Whilst there Images were revolving them-
feives in my mind, we approach'd the wooden
Portcullis that guards the melancholy Avenues
of a terrestrial Hell. Virgil exprefles himfelfvery
beautifully concerning the Stygian Palace, re-
tided in by the Son-in-Law of Ceres.
- lNoes atque dies patet atri Janua Ditis
' -r-!cili .efk defcenfu Averni;
Sed revccare Gradum fuperafque evadere ad aural,
Hic Labor hoc ops eft
6 -

S_ ..

Sipift of Aceef s i Ceres grizty Son,
Hbt Brazen Gates on ready Hinges turn
But fromn Avernus, and the Realms of Night;
Vproards to move, and view the cEthereal Light
'his is the Tas-- -
But we found the' Cafe quite alter'd in this
House of Torment, and it was almost as difficult
for us that were without doors to get in, as it
was for them within doors to get out: HisCer-
beruflip demanded our Business, and by the Grim-
ness of his Face, gave us a dreadful Idea of the
Horrors which are inseparable to the inferna
Ma.sss. I told him very civilly, that I was come
to fee a Friend of mine in Confinement; That
it being Sunday, I concluded a Visit to Perfdns
either Sick or in Prison, was as acceptable to the
Divine Goodness, as offering up my Devotions
at Church. He smiled at my Notions of Piety,
and turning the Key, not without an insolent
Grin, gave us admittance to a'Scene of Horror,
which difcover'd the Prudence, Christianity and
Tenderness, of the City Government. The Gen-
tleman was call'd down from breathing in the Air
upon the Leads, who occafion'd us that Visit.
After tome Complements of Condoleance being
pass'd betwixt us, we defir'd him to entertain
himself with a Quart of comfortable Ale; and
if that was not potent enough to make him for-
get his Cares, we engag'd him to mingle it with
.the Infallible Prescription of a Nipperkin of
Brandy. Whilt we amused our selves with our
Curiosity, and the dismal Diverlion of the Sable
Apartments, a multiplicity of different Figures
immediately presented themselves of both Sexes,
and almost of all Ages and Conditions; Their
Visages were pale and gha tly; their Dress
fquallidly negleted iand the Disorder of their

Ddd d 3 Sealr

Seats ffficiently appear'd, by the Contempt they
had of their Bodies; one walk'd as swiftly as a
bending Tradesman from a Saturday Dun, when,
God knows, he was as near his Journeys end, as
a decaying Whore is to a Bawd, or a young
giggling Girl to the loss of her Maiden-head.
Another mos demurely, with Hat, Cane and
Gloves, and the Phiz of Business, marches from
one fide of the Ward to another, as if he was
just a going to the Exchange, to monopolize the
Commodities of both the Indies; when, alas, the
Wretch has never seen that bulie place since a
Brace of ill-looking Officers whifper'd him in the
Ear, a fort of a scurvy Story, and in secure and
safe Cultody, brought him to a Warc-houfe
which he pays no Rent for, yet nevertheless has
got but a very indifferent Bargain. A third
Damns his Attorney, and a fourth curses as
heartily his Wife. That Rgue of a Lawyer, fays
one of these irreligious Recluses, raging and al-
molt mad with his Misfortunes, if he had not
pig.'d ffjlt and loose with me , I had never been
brought to tbhi. Canfound that Villain of a Creditor,
continues, who brin'd the Y-ge and 7Jury; and the
Devil take the Jury that fold my Cause. Here flarts
up another, and in an infinite Pailion demanded,
What Reason he had to use so many Execrations?
Pray Sir, fays the Party that ask'd the Question,
if you hac-e Jo good ,a hand at Cursing, do me the
Ffaur to czrfie my IVife; Aly W)ife, a Pliague con-
fcotnd her, bL oug;t- me hither ; To my l4ife I onwe thij
£antafical M rijyr)', this horid Air, and this ridi-
culfio Habit. She broughr me nothrino, adds he,
jefore Cbonfiiurmmtion,bzt Pride,Poverty and Levwdnefs
and thrt .ws a Portion with a Vengeance ; but ilnce
the fatal moment cf tal.kn For Better and Worse-
He would have run on a brace of Hours upon
this Nuptial Panegyrick, but we decently lett

-;. *~ ' ~ him

him to make his C9mplaint amongfl the liltninF
Herd of his Fello}v-fifferers, and turn'd o.,
selves about, in order to refleC with concern 'up-
on a Figure lamentably wretched ; the very Pi-
eture of Sadness itself: His Air was dejeted
Despair and solid Melancholy took up their Re-
lidence upon his Face, and interwove themselves
in all his Discourses and AAions; yet his Mif-
fortunes had not absolutely rob'd him of every
thing that was agreeable: His Judgment remain-
ed very penetrating, and his good Manners and
Civility render'd him unworthy of the Condition
that the Capriciousness of Fortune had reduc'd
him to. We addreft our selves to him, and beg-
ged the knowledge of those ill Accidents that
had brought him to a Station so different from
what we imagin'd he was once in pofflelion of.
Whether to oblige our Enquiries, or to indulge
his Grief by the Repetition of his Story, I am
uncertain; but he gave us to understand, in ve-
ry pathetick Terms, That he was.a Person had
made a handsome appearance in the World;
that he had been Master of a very considerable
Efate, and tho' he had not comply'd with his
Payments so exacly as Sir F-- C.-d, yet jhe
had more punctually perform'd his Word than
S$reetapple or F---s. That he was in very thri-
ving Circumstances, when his Affairs oblig'd
him to take a Journey into the Country; where
flaying, by the means of Sickness that detain'd
him a little longer than was expeced, a Sober
Religious Common-Council-MIan, with whom he
had dealt feveraloYears, took out'a Statute againfi
him, seiz'd three times the value of what he ow'd,
which was moft.of it spent at Pontac's or the
Rummer, upon debating the weighty Points of
Contribution and Dividends; then seiz'd upon
his Person; threw him into the Comptei, and took

Ddd4 care

care his Family Ihould be like the State of the
Christian Church, difperft and diftreft over the
Face of the whole Earth, We pity'd the Inju.
ftice he had met with, and return'd to my Friend,
with whom I could not help murmuring againit
the Imprudence of some part of our Legal Con.
flitutions. We wonder'd, that a Thief should
be hang'd for some fort of Felonies, and by that
means find an end of his Torment, and for other
A&ions of like nature have the Benefit of the Cler.
gy; when neither the Law nor the Gospel found
means to discharge an Insolvent Debtor. That
according to the unhappy Severity of our Laws,
we might at a much easier rate offend Heaven,
than be indebted to Man; and that in all degrees
of Criminal Cafes, the Prisoner some way or o-
ther made his Exit from a Dungeon: A Debtor
is the only Prisoner for Life, and his Misfortune
is hereditary to his Family; the Innocent Chil-
dren share the Punilhment of their Father, who
was never accessary to his Guilt; and Vengeance
here is extended to the third and fourth Gene-
ration. My Amrerican, tho' he had been a Wit-
ness to the several Pal'ages I have related, yet
would needs impose upon me so far, as to affirm
the Inhabitants of these Catacombs, were Persons
guilty of a Murder, and here expiated their
Crimes by the Confinement of their Persons. I
told him indeed, that whosoever had brought
themselves thither, were a fort of Self-Murder-
ers, and so (-according to the Opinion of the
Orthodox ) fuaflerd the Pain and Penalty of Dam-
nation. But truly speaking, tlefe Unfortunates
rather fuffer'd than avoided that Crime; and,
without dispute, of all Persons whatsoever, are
n-ofi worthy our Compaflon. For my part, fays
7, riling to be gone, after I had put an end to a
i.? Co toJatieons ~which I gave my inchanted

!Friend)

Friend, This Place is certainly Purgatorys, and
agrees very well with the Chara&er Virgil gave
us of that infernal Prison, some 2000 Years ago;
you ihall fee the Description when I meet you
the other fide of this Castle; mean time I wilh
you all the Satisfaction so uncomfortable a Place
can afford you.

The Thames.
OW (said I to my Indian) I have feasted your
N Curiosity with such variety of Amusements
upon Terra firma, I'll present you upon the Water
with a furprizing Entertainment,that shall startle
you much more than all the hair-brain'd Confu-
sions, or ridiculous Adventures, you- have ever
met with on this fide the Equinoctial. Then
your iiver, fays he, mult afford something that
is very extraordinary, for I think your Streets
and Publick-Houfes abound with such an amazing
Medly of all manner of Contrarieties, that if a
Man had the Eyes of Argis, he might imploy
them all in this your Christian Babel to his conti-
nual SatisfaEion. However I ihall be glad to
wait upon you, if forno other reafoni, but the
Benefit of a little fresh Air in this sultry Weather.

Finding my Antipodean Companion thus agree-
able to my Humour, I fteer'd him down Black-
fryars towards the Thames fide, till coming near
the Stairs, where from their Lowzy Benches up
itarted such a noisy multitude of old grizly Tri-
tons, in sweaty Shirts, and fhort-skirted Doublets,
hollowing and hooting out, Next Oars and Skullers,
shaking their Cuckolds Caps over their bald Nod-
dles, teeming as overjoy'd to fee us, as if we had
been Foreign Princes come out of itark Love

and

and Kindness to redeem them and their Families
from Cruel Popery and Slavery, Adds Flesh,
fays my poor frighted Indian, let's not venture
any further, in the Name of Neptune, What are
this Crowd of Mermidons, who approach us so
like Cairnibals, as if they refolv'd to devour us,
and were squabbling with one another at the
fight of their Prey, who should have the first Bit?
Never fear, said I, with one word I'll put you out
of your Pain; and with that I bawl'd out as loud
as a Speaking-Trumpet, Next Oars, and away
run Captain Charon from the Front of his wran-
gling Fraternity, with a Badge upon his Arm,
that the World might behold whose Slave he
was, and hollow'd to his Man Ben to bring the
Boat near, whilst the reft withdrew to their
Seats; calling one another Louzy Rogue and Sorry
Ra/cal, giving us a clear palfage without further
Molestation. Upon my word, fays my Indian
Friend, I am glad we are past them, for this
is one of the most ill-looking Rabble, and from
whom I had more Apprehensions of Danger,
than from any I have yet met with. 'Tis all,
said I, but an Amusement, ftep into the Boat,
lit down Water-men, row us up to Chelsea: No
sooner had we put off into the middle of the
Stream, but our Charon and his Assistant (being
jolly Fellows) began to scatter their verbal Wild-
fire on every fide of them, -their first Attack
being on a couple of fine Ladies with a Foot-
man in the Stern as follows, viz. How now you
t o Confederate Brimstones, lWhere are you fiimmino
with your Fine Top- knots, to invite some InrifJ Bully
or Scotch LHiohlander, to scour your cloven Furbiloes
for a Petticoat Pension ? P11 warrant your poor Cuckolds
,'e ho-'erigr aboret Cban.ge, to hear what News from
S!anders, wh;'Wl you like a couple of hollow-belly'd
p-' s7 are Jiling up te Spring-Garden to cram

one

one end with roafled Fowls, and the other with raw
Sauffages. One of the Ladies taking Courage,
pluck'd up a Female Spirit of Revenge, and
facing us with the Gallantry of an Armaon, made
the following return, vit.. Get you home you old
Cuckold, look under your Wives Bed, and fee what a
lusty Gardener has been planting, a Son of a Wh-- e
in your Parfley-Bed: 0 how fond the old Fool will
be of the Fruits of another Man's Labour, wjen the
Midwife vouches the Batard to' be the true Pigure
of his Daddy: Out you old Rogue, Gray before you're
Good, and Bald before you're mannerly; hold your
Bawling you ruJfy old Churl, whose dogoed Counte-
nance masks ycu look as if you vwere begot by a Tan-
ner's Mafttff; tatlknot to a Woman, you surly Whelp,
for you arb fit for nothing, hut like the Breed you
come on,' to crawl upon all four, and cry Bow wow at
a Bear-Garden.

No sooner had we saluted each other with
these Water-Compliments, as we pass'd by, but
a Weitern-Boat, 'tow'd with a mixture of both
Sexes, began a fresh Attack upon us in manner
following, viz. How now Old Dad Whither are
your Afin and you carrying that King of the Gypsies
you have pickld up for a Fare ? Why he looks as if he
had painted his Face with a Cbilds Surreverence, to
make his Countenance shine liks a Turmerick Puddong.
Out you nasty T-d colour'd Dog, born upon a Dung-
hill without 'a Head, that your Mother was forc'd to
supply the DefeS with a yellow Pumkin.' Whicl,
unsavory Complement was thus retorted by our
foul-mouth'd Prolocutor, viz. Stop your Smoak,-
hole Nincompoop, What laden for Puddle-dock with
aTylors, Bayliffs, fat Bawds and Chamber-maids ?
Shoot your Rubbifi, you Rogue, at the next Lay-fall,
and carry back Dung to the next Gardener's House,
that you may beg a Bunch of Carrets for the Sow your
Bed-fellow to flop her mouth from Scolding. Who

?was

wvas it that caught the Boat-builders Yourney.man
kting his Wife, and forgave him for half a doen of
Mother Shepherd's Beer, because he swore upon the
Old Womans Bible; 'twas thefirft time ? 0 rare Tom
Sanders, you Lye like a Cuckold; Get yougone you
old Fumbler to my Dame Tofield's Daughter, and
make a Fool of the poor Wench ini the House of Office
and after Kifi the Mother upon H'rn-Fair-day for
Nuts and Ginger- bread.

This Dialogue being thus ended, the next
that we met was a jolly Parson, skudding from
Lamr eth-Holufe in a Skuller, fitting at the upper
end1 of the Boat by himself, like a Lady in a Lob-
fter-fhell. Rare Game, Mafrer, cries our Navi-
cular Spokes-man, and thus he accosted the Man
of Scripture as soon as within hearing, viz. Well
met Holy Father, I'll warrant in your time you have
drawn as many Tyth-Pigs in at your Mouth, and out
at your Fundament, as would have fJockd Bartho.
lomew-Fair for a lrbole Season, or else you could
n7ever h.ve Jb sn such a fat Gut to your lean Pa-
rijfioners. Ab Doior, 'tis a Jign the Church is at a
low Ebb, or else a long Scarf and a Rose Hatband,
wruld never be so humble, as to be seen lolling in a
S_.:!llr in ftch a pious Age too, when every Wappfing
Vndci-rrapper, thi.t has but a Congregation of old
li;'men to hold himielf forth to, scorns to have less
than Oars, tho' he crosses but the Water to administer
Comfo-r to a Hily Sifter. Thou art a wicked Repro-
atre Pill rarrant thee, reply'd the Priest, Prithee
desire the Minijtier of your l'arif to teach thee the
Lord's Pra.er and the Ten Commandments, that thou
may f not S cut 'o this 'iorld in thy old Age like a

eat het'l, .,:d be drmn'd in the ncxt for the Sin of
wmidl ,jqnrr.::ce. Tia,:t you Maifer, cries old
Grizzle, for your ;od Aavice, but I believe 'tis the
frjti '.: e.er o:! 'i'ejcsv'd so generously without being
Do.iid i';- t ' * , v is t.' thar ever the plentiful Age

of

if Paslve Obedience and Non-Re si ance, Afould ever
be chang'd into the mercenary 7imes of Moderation
a Vertue.
No sooner had we fteer'd clear of Divinity,
but we fell foul (in words I mean) upon a nimble
pair of Oars, fraighted with a couple of Scarlet
Officers, and between them a Lady furbulo'd
with all the Colours of the Rain-bow; no sooner
were they come up a broad fide of us, but our
bold Son of Neptune, seconded by his Man, be-
gan a vigorous Attack upon the Sons of Mars,
who fat hugging their Venws, as the two Elders
did Susanna, viz. 'Efaith noble Captain,you lay close
Siege, I dare fuiear, at the very first Assault, Loves
Fortress willfurrender upon your own Terms ; tho' I
can tell you this for your Comfort, as focn as your
Ammunition is spent, and your Guns are dismounted,
you'll be forc'd to quit the Poflejfion: But whatever yozt
do, take care before you enter, that the Castle is not
on fire, for if itjhould, you had better break up your
Siege, than go on any further. Hold your Tongue, you
old Swobber, replies one of the Heroes, and pull off
my Lord Mayor's 7acket and Louze your self, or else,
you Rogue, re will have you whip'd in Bridewel, for
fffering his Lordjhip's Livery to be over-run with Ver-
min, to the Dishonour of the City. You are mifakeen,
Captain, cries Bullface, a Louse is a Soldier's Corn-
panion, and not a Waterman's; therefore pray lookt
in your own Collar, for a Red-coat and a Creeper are
inseparable Companions, as a Dog and a Flea, fir-
ginity and a C-b-loufe. Out, you nafly Fellow, cries
the Lady, what an old Man and a Beast. Why
how now Madam Rain-bow, cries our Advocate,
what so young a Wench and Jo notorious a Strumpet,
to have two Soldiers at a time to relieve your Concu-
pifcence, when Venus her self, the damnedfi Whore
in the Heavens, was contented with but one, tho' Jle
had fifty times your Beauty,

The

was it that caught the Boat-builders Journey-man
ksiing his Wife, and forgave him for half a dozen of
Mother Shepherd's Beer, because he swore upon the
OldWoman's Bible, 'twas the firif time ? 0 rare Tom
Sanders, you Lye like a Cuckold ; Get you gone you
old Fumbler to my Dame Tofield's Daughter, and
make a Fool of the poor Wench im the House of Office;
and after Kifs the Mother upon H'rn-Fair-day for
Nuts and Ginger- bread.

This Dialogue being thus ended, the next
that we met was a jolly Parson, skudding from
Lam'eth-Houfe in a Skuller, fitting at the upper
end'of the Boat by himself, like a Lady in a Lob-
ter-ihell. Rare Game, Master, cries our Navi-
cular Spokes-man, and thus he accosted the Man
of Scripture as soon as within hearing, viz. Well
met Holy Father, I'll warrant in your time you have
drawn as many Tyth-Pigs in at your Mouth, and out
atyour Fundamcfnt, as woquld have floc&d Bartho.
lomew-Fair for a whole Season, or else you could
never have fe.fin such a fat Gut to your lean Pa-
rifizioners. Ah Doetor, 'tis a fgn the Church is at a
lwn Ebb, or else a long Scarf and a Rose Hatband,
rould never be so humble, as to be seen lolling in a
lS!.ll-r in ruch a pions Age too, wnhen every Wapping
'ndcrf-rapFper, th't has but a Congregation of old
lif 'men to hold himself forth to, jcorns to have less
than Oars, tbo' he crosses but the Water to adminifier
Comrfort to a Hliy Sifter. Thou art a wicked Repro-
bare r IP arrant thee, reply'd the Priest, Prithee
defrre the A!inifrer o your PariJi to teach thee the
LordPs Pr,-I:er and the Ten Commandments, that thou
mn -tj nor eo oit 'f '
this World in thy old Age like a
Heathe,, 'ard be d3imnd in the ncxt for the Sin of
milfl .,ni'r.sace. T:an: you Mlafler, cries old
Grizzle, br your -Vd; od 4Aavice, but I believe 'tis the
'.rs trH.t ezver Y'ot i.ejt d so generously without being
o.Ad '.; - t . w. ts ?/;, that ever the plentiful Age

of

Of Pafi. e Obedience and Non-ReJftJace, J ould ever
be chang'd into the mercenary Times of Moderation
a Vertue.
iNo sooner had we fteer'd clear of Divinity,
but we fell foul (in words I mean) upon a nimble
pair of Oars, fraighted with a couple of Scarlet
Officers, and between them a Lady furbulo'd
with all the Colours of the Rain-bow; no sooner
were they come up a broad fide of us, but our
bold Son of Neptune, seconded by his Man, be-
gan a vigorous Attack upon the Sons of Mars,
who fat hugging their Venw, as the two Elders
did Su/anna, viz. 'Efaith noble Captain,you lay close
Siege, I dare frear, at the very fir/ Apfault, Loves
Fortress lill surrender upon your own Terms ; tho' I
can tell you this for your Comfort, as focn as your
Ammunition is spent, and your Guns are dismounted,
you'll be forc'd to quit the Pofejfion: But-whatever ydot
do, take care before you enter, that the Castle is n.ot
on fire, for if it flold, you had better break up your
Siege, than To on any further. Hold your 'Tongue, you
old Swobber, replies one of the Heroes, and pull of
my Lord Mayor's Jacket and Louze your self, 'or else,
you Rogue, we will have you whi'd in Bridewel, for
suffering his Lordjhip's Livery to be over-run wit FVer-
min) to the Dijhonour of the City. Tou are mifaken,
Captain, cries Bullface, a Louse is a Soldier's Com-
panion, and not a Waterman's; therefore pray look
in your own Collar, for a Red-coat and a Creeper are
inseparable Companions, as a Dog and a Flea, r.r-
ginity and a C-b-loufe. Out,you natl Fellow, cries
the Lady, what an old Man and a Beast. Why
how now Madam Rain-bow, cries our Advocate,
what so young a Wench and Jo notorious a Strumpet,
to have two Soldiers at a time to relieve your Concu-
pifcence, when Venus her self, the damnedjk Whore
in the Heavens , was contented writh but one, tho' flie
had fifty times your Beauty.

The

The next that we encounter'd was a Qiaker
and his Handmaid, with whom our merry Pilate
thus began his Drollery, vi:. Well done Holy ones,
I fee Aminadab will have his Abigal, as well as
the wicked ones their Harlots; in spite of the Holy
Spirit G-s Lambs will play, tro' they fin after a
fanrified manner; by and by fiap goes the Cakes,and
ihiz cries the Bottle-Ale; Then, 0 Abigal, since
the Light of thy Countenance hath moved the outward
Man to uncover thy Nakednes ; I fay stretch thou
forth one Leg towards Dan, the other towards Bar-
iheba, and hold up thy filefy Idol, that I may raise
Seed unto thy Husband Abraham, who at present is
a weaklFriend, and cannot, as he ought, adminifJer
the Comforts of Wedlock unto thee his Wife. Out
upon thee, fays the Quaker, for a foul Friend, thou
art the Seed of the Serpent, and the Light is not in
thee : 0 Generation of Vipers ! that this River Jordan
fjould be so defiPd in the hearing of the Saints, by thy
abominable Vtterance. I fay untothee, Repent, Re-
pent, or that wicked Member, thy unruly Tongue, will
at last bring thee to be buffetted by Satan. Thus our
Waterman's Language so provok'd the Quaker,
that the Spirit mov'd him to Hold-forth, but
meeting each other, and rowing contrary ways,
we had but a short Benefit of his pious Exhorta-
tions.

Pray, fays my Moletto Companion (pointing
at the Folly) What noble Strunure is that float-
ing upon the Water ? I have often heard of
Castles in the Air, and this seems to me to be
a kind of an Fffay towards such a windy Projed.
That whimsical Piece of Archite&, said I, was
defign'd as a Musical Summer-house for the En-
tertainment of Quality, where they might meet,
and ogle one another into.a Fit of those amorous
Vapours, that are not to.be cur'd by any other
Eeans, than by the secret Administration of a

little

little mutual Familiarity. But the Ladies of the
Town, finding it as convenient a Rendezvous
for their purpose, over-ftock'd the place with
such an Inundation of Harlotry, that dash'd the
Female Quality out of Countenance, and made
them seek some more retir'd Conveniency, where
they might carry on their amorous Intrigues with
greater privacy.

For Secret Whores, raho Sin to ease Love's Pain ,.
Cry Soh at thife that do the like for Gain.
By these means the Mercenaries of the Town
drove away their private Enemies, (who hinder
the Trade of the Publick, by dispensing their
Favours gratis in a corner) and entirely pofrefs'd
themselves of this moveable Manfion,which they
have -occupy'd ever since, very much to their ad-
vantage.. Therefore vw'll ftep on board, where
perhaps we may meet with some Novelty or
other that may- oblige your Curiosity: So ac-
cordingly we bid the Watermen row us to the
Folly, where we no sooner enter'd, but we had
as many Ladies staring us in our Faces, as if we
had been either handfom to admiration, or ugly
to a Miracle; so that we could scarce move with-
out crippling the Corns of an old Bawd, or dif-
obliging the lac'dSho'oes of a young Harlot; but
with much ado we broke through the leading
File of there Amazonian Strumpets, and thrust
our selves into the body of the Seraglio, where
from Fifteen to Fifty we could have fitted our
selves with Concubines of any Age, Stature or
Comple&ion, for we were so surrounded with a
Crowd of Ctrtizans of all forts and sizes, mix'd
with those ignominious Vermin their Ruffinly
Protectors, that a Man could not stir without
jofling a Tun-belly'd Bawd, a Furbilo'd Whore,

or

or a Long-fivorded Bully; some dancing as they
rhov'd, to shew the Airynefs of their Temper;
some ogling their Gallants, to ihew their vicious
Inclinations; and others crowded into Boxes,
like Paltengers into a Western Wherry, fat
fmoaking their Noses, and drinking Burnt-
Brandy, to defend their Stomachs from the chill
Air upon the Water; the young Whores squint-
ing about like Rabbits in a Warren; the old
ones mumbling perfum'd Almonds, to disguise
the nauseous Sowernefs of their stinking Breaths:
Beaus, some tattling and cringing to a pack of
Twelve-penny Strumpets, as if they were Ladies
of Quality; others humming Chickens and Sparra-
grass, now and then dancing as they walk'd to
their own Mufick. In short, It was such a con-
fafed Scene of Folly, Madness and Debauchery,
that we ftep'd again into our Boat without Drink-
ing, to avoid the Incon'eniencies that attend
mixing with such a Swarm of Caterpillars, who
are always dangerous to the Unwary, and de-
ftruftive to the Innocent. Now proceeding our
intended Voyage,
'The next diverting Scene that the River
afforded us, was a very warm Engagement be-
tween a VWetern Barge and a Boat full of Lam-
beth Gardeners, by whom Billingsgate was much
outdone in ftupendious Obscenity, tonitrous
Verbosity, and malicious Scurrility, as if one fide
had been Daniel D-s--'s Party, and the other
the Obfervator's: And because the Reader shall
have a Taste of their modest Dialeet, and incom-
parable Breeding, I have ventur'd to stain the
Paper with some of their spiteful Eloquence, viz.
Ba, a, a., Sheep-ficalers, cry'd the Gardeners to
the Barge-men, Wahat .Kin are you to Tim Collet
'f Staines, that Beat hbi orn Father, flood Pimp to
his Miother, Lay rith his Sifler, and B--d his

Brother,

Brother, all in one Night: He wa a Wefern Barge-
man, you Rogues, he wd so. Fob, you nafly Dogs,
reply d the Barge-men, that get your Bread by the
drippings of other Peoples Fundaments ; well may you
pray for the Dunghil, for if that Jhould fail you, no
T-d no Gardener. Who ras that, you Rogues, that
dung'd in his own Cap at Stocks-M'arket, and car-
ry'd home the old Gold to inrich his Radifl-Bed
Out upon you for a Pack of Snail-picking Adamites
Who was it that took, the old Woman from Weeding,
and gave her a Flurt under the Burgamy-Pear-Tree,
and when he was caught by his Prentice, gave the Boy
a Holy-day, because he Jhould not tell his Mistress ?
With this fort of Billingsgate Facundity were we
merrily entertain'd , till we had arriv'd at that
Port to which we had confign'd our selves, where
we quitted our Boat, and offering old Charon
Three Shillings, he swore he would have a Crown;
but having the printed Rates in my Pocket, I
was forc'd to lug out my Oracle before the Fresh-
water Looby would be convinc'd of his Error;
and withal told him, Had it been in London,'I
would have carry'd him before my Lord Mayor,
and have had him punifh'd, for making, contrary
.to Law, so unreasonable a Demand. With that
he takes the Money, and putting off his Boat,
gave us a notable Farewel after the following
manner, viz.. ou're a couple of niggardly Sons of
Whores; I care not a Fart for my Lord M---r;
Damn the Rogue that printed that Book>; a Pox take
you for a Book-learn'd Blockhead ; and a P--e
confound him that taught-you to read; And so we
parted... My Friend and I,. after a little Refresh-
ment, returning home by Land, merrily reflecing
on the coiiiical Pafages we had met with on the
Water.

The Dispensary, a Farce.

Written in the Year 1697.
Jobn Gaden, Docor of Phyfick, and Fellow of the

Royal College of Physicians, London..
Tom Galypot, An Apothecary by Trade, but pra-

difes Phyfick as a Do&or, near - Garden.
Lancet Pefile, An Apothecary by Profession, but

boldly undertakes to be a Physician and Sur-
geon also, to all his Patients that want the as-
fifance of either; living in--Market.
Retorto Spatula d'VlceroJfo An Apothecary in--

Lane, but pretends to be a great Do&or, Sur-
geon and Chymift, valuing himself much up-
on his Foreign Birth and Education.
ack Comprebenfive, An Apothecary living in-
Street, who profeires himself only to be a Do-
&or, Surgeon, Chymift, Druggist, Distiller,
Confefioner, and (on occasion ) Corncutter,
e c. . ;. . .
Trueman, A Gentleman of honest Principles, en-

deavouring to ihow each Person their Faults,
and persuading them to. a& in their own
Sphere only.
Mefengers, Glyfier-pipes, Mortars, Sawrs, Forceps,

Boxes, Bolt-beads, Crucibles, &c. and other At-
tendants.

The S C E N E Apothecaries-Hall.
ACT I. SC E N E I.
Enter Dr. Galen and Trueman.
7rue.'Y\Ocor, Good Morrow, What News do

JJ you hear about the Plot ? who are ta-
ken up ? who are Evidences ? are there' any Per-
sons of Quality concern'd in it, d'ye hear ?

Dr.

Dr. Gaien. I mind no Plots, not I, but a Plot to.
get good frore of Patients, if I can, but I think
they never were so Healthy.

Sr. So what ? you seem to speak a little con-
cerh'd, and look as if something had vex'd you,
what's the matter, Dodor ?

Dr. Matter, let me tell you, Mr. Trueman, I
have been a Physician in London almost Forty
Years, and I never knew so little Business to do
in all my Life-time. 'Tis a Damnable Hcalthy
Town grown since I knew it first. l have known
the Time when I could go out and pick up lo
or T2 i. in a Morning, come home to Dinner
and empty, so out again after to replenish. But
I am sure the times now are so hard, that if my
good Father had not conveniently ftep'd aside,
I could no more have bragg'd of living by my
Wit, as some Men do, than the D- s of
N-- can of her Chastity.

Tr. Pray Docor not too severe. Why Dam-
nable Healthy ?

Dr. I call that Damnable Healthy (though I
know it bears another Sense) when the Sickness
is not great enough to require the Skill of a Phy-
fician, but every ignorant Apothecary assumes.
the Cure, and pretends to know more than the
learn'dft Physician of us all ?

Tr. What? Then you would not have the A-
pothecaries recover Peoples Health ? Would you ?

Dr. Yes but I would, by all means, only let
'em do their part in their own Sphere, and with-
in their own Limits or Bounds.
E Tom Gallypot peeps in, with h Glifler-pipe in one

hand, and a Cordial Bolm in t'ather.
Tr. Come in, come in, we were no sooner
talking of Rogues, but enters an Apothecary:
Prethee, Tom, where haft been that thou com'ft
with the Accoutrements of thy Profelllon thus ?

e ez Tomn

7om G. Truly, Sir, I have been at your House;
your Lady was not very well to day, and Ihe sent
for me to-to-to-Cannonade her Posteriors:
You know by my Instrument what I have been
doing. And now I have done that, 1 have pre-
fcrib'd a Specifick Bolus for her to take after it.

Tr. A Pox of your Specifick Bolus, and you.
My Wife is never well but when ihe fancies' her
self ill, and is taking Phyfick,I think. Prithee,
Mr. Gallypot, what.will be the Charges of this
Morning's Work?

Gallyp. 0, Sir, but little, you never stand up-
onthat I am sure for your Lady's good; ihe must
also have a Pearl Julep, and an Anodyne Draught,
and then I hope she'll be very speedily well again.

Tr. A Pox had you with your cramp Names.
Tell me what all this will col ? I am sure I left
her well not above an Hour ago.

Gallyp. [ Starts back ] Good Sir, be not so un-
reasonably passionate, andI'll tell you. Sir, the
Pearl Julep will be 6 s. and 8 d. Pearls being dear
since our Clipt Money was current. The Speci-
sick Bolus 4 s. and 6 d. I never reckon less; my
Master in Leadelnall-ftreet never fee down less, be
it what it would. The Antihyfterick Glyfter 3 s.
and 6 d. (a common one is but 2 s. 6 d. ) and the
.Anodyne Draught 3 s. and 4 d. That's all, Sir, a
finals matter, and please you, Sir, for your Lady.
My Fee is what you please, Sir, All .the Bill is
bat Eighteen Shillings.

7r. Very rfne, ffaith, d'ye make a But at it?
I do suppose, to be Genteel, I muff give you a
Crown.

Gallyp. If your Worlhip please ; I take it to be
a fair, and an honest Bill...

Tr. Do you so indeed ? But I wish you had cal-
led a Doaor, perhaps he would have advis'd hei
to have forbore taking any thing, as yet at least.
so I had fav'd 3s. in my Pocket. Gall

Gallyp. 0 Sir, call a Doetor, we never do that
at least very rarely, till we have done alLwe can
with the Patients; and when we can't tell what
to do with 'em, then we oblige a DoEtor, and
call him in.

Dr. Very fairly confessed, Mr. Gallypot, I be-
lieve you never spoke a truer thing in all youR
Life. I am glad to hear your Confelfion to i
Trueman; and am-very sorry the State does not
think fit to handle you a little for your unrea-
fonable Practices. I fee you have Impudence to
demand a Fee too, but do wonder you should do
it before, my Face.
Gallyp. Truly, Docor, I did not mind you.
However, I hope I may take what Gentlemen
please to give me.
Dr. Pleas'd to give you! Faith, I am aiham'd
to fee Gentlemen so impos'd upon by ye Mrs.
Docors.
Gallyp. Troth, Doctor, that was a Lucky
Thought of yours, we are but Mrs. tho' they
commonly call us Doctors. And now you put
me in mind of it, ha'nt you seen my Paper, fit
out March 2. i695.. wherein I make above half
the College of Phpicians Mrs. tho' they are cal-
led Do&ors among themselves ?
Tr. How I Mr. Gallypot; How do you do that?
That's a Trick and an half, pray let's know it.
Gallyp. 0 Lord, Mr. Truman, can't you guess
how ? If the DoCor pleases, I'll tell you imnme-
diately.
Dr. With all my Heart-
Gallyp. I can infallibly prove more than that if
I once undertake it: You must know,_ that 1 own
none to be Docors, but those who have regular-
ly done their Exercises for Phyfick in one of or:
Universities; that's plain: But hold a little,
here's my Brother Pestle of Iing-Jtreet, com ing in-

Fe e 3 1h

he can be a Witness of the whole. I Gad, I have
so ferreted and humbled 'em, that I'll spoil their
Association against the Apothecaries; for they
have Afnbciated by the Names of Do&ors, and
I'll prove above half of'em to be but Mrs. at belt.
[Enter Lancet Peftle,with a Plaifier-box in his hand.]

Brother Pestle, I am glad you are come in, in
this nick of time; I was jutl telling Mr. Trueman
how I have humbled the College of Physicians;
has'nt thee read my Paper of Queries, I put out
AIarch z. I695. Do'st not fee how smartly and
finely I jerk 'em ?- Hey.

Petile. Ay Brother, I must needs fay you have
done your part very handsomely, tho' I don't
hear any Body took much notice of what you said.

Gallyp, True, that may be; and does not that
shew their want of Vnderftanding the more?
None but a Blockhead would flight such smart
Refletions.

Pefle. I am in haste, and must go to bleed an
Eminent Citizen in Tower-ftrect. So I am in
haste.

Tr. Hold a little, Mr. Pejile, one Word with
you before you go. Blood, Mr. Pestle ! thought
you had been an Apprentice to an Apothecary.

Pejle. So I was, Sir, but I thank God, and my
own Indulfry, I'have by my Diligence perfe&ly
acquired the whole Knowledge of Surgery. I
Phlebotomize as well as the belt Surgeon in Lon-
don, tho' I fay it that should not fay it. I'll tell
you how I came to be so dextrous in performing
that Operation in particular .

Tr. Well, now am I fairly hope up, between
t:vo of ye, one endeavouring to prove all iis Do-
&ors to be Masters, and t'other Ihowing his dex-
terity in Phlebotomizing, as he calls it. What a
Pox, were not both of ye bred Apothecaries?
:. . -' '- . --. . .
". : Gall,

Gallyp.; and Pefil. Sir, Pray be not So pafio-
nate. 'Yes we were both of us bred Apotheca-
ries. But Knowledge--- '
-

Enter Mefenger., :
Me/fl Is Dr. Pefle here
Pestle. Yes he is. What d'ye' come from Sir
Thomas iii T'oer-fireet ? What does he want to
be let blood immediately ?
.Mel:f Yes, Sir, he dbes, and flays for you.
Pestle. Good Lad, Well, I'll come presently.

E[Exit Mejfen.
Now I know he will 'be blooded by no body else;
I have persuaded him that all the Surgeons are
Blunderers, as to Bleeding. Sir ¶Ioma- is a
good-natur'd Gentleman. He believes that no
body'underftands the curing a Disease, or an Ul-
cer, or indeed aiy 'thing, but an Apothecary.
Faith he' is one of the honefteft Gentlemen in
England. ' :

Tr. You make hinrda fine Gentleman indeed.
Honest for no other reason, as 1' fee, but be-
cause he suffers himself to be made a Fool of by
such as you.

Pestle. But, Mr. Trueman, aflure your self he's
a Man of very good Sense; all the Apothecaries
in Town fay so, arnd' then I am sure it must be
true. .He pays well, and takes Phyfick freely:
hefides', ' 1 particularly know his Confitution;
after Bleeding, : he must take a Purge or two,
then some Cordial Powders, Dulcifiers of the
Blood, 'aiidi two or three odd things inore. But
as I was fayying, this' SirThomas has'h Vein as fine
and as cmali, as the'fireft. Silk you cai: imagine.

Tr. But suppose this true, does this make you
a complea't Surgeon, so as to undertake the Cure
of any'Ulkder or Wound'?

Pestle. Puh ! Mr. 7rueman, I tell you 'tis an
eafie thing for a Man of Parts to be a Surgeon;

Eee4 do

do but buy a Lancet, Forceps, Saw; talk a little
of Contusions, Fraaures,Comprefs and Bandage;
you'll presently, by most People, be thought an
excellent Surgeon. Efpecially-d'ye mind me-
Lord, you Nod, methinks, as if you were Sleepy.

Tr. 0, Sir, I hear you :, But I fate up late last
Night, and am a little Drowsy. But I heard you
fay you were a Man of Parts, I think, and that
you had two Familiar Acquaintance Compress
and Bandage: I grant it, Sir, [rubbing his Eyes]
but flill how does this make you a Surgeon? You
may as well fay, my keeping Company with a
Bishop, may make me a good Divine.

Pestle. Alas! poor Gentleman, I find you did
not sleep well last Night. Hah! Hah.! I can't
but laugh at your Mistake. My two Acquain-
tance! Hah! Hah! Hah! a pretty Mistake !-
but true enough: For a Man muftbe acquainted
with his Business indeed; now Compress and
Bandage being a part of it, you may term them
my Familiar Acquaintance,if-you pleafeMr.True-
man -Lord, I think the Devil's in you for Drow-
liness, and Gaping.

7r. Pray, Mr. Peffle, pray fay something then
that may divert me and keep me awake, for I
protest, to hear you talk: of Skill in Surgery will
never do; for my part I am for emplQying every
Man in his own way, the Doctor for Advice, the
Apothecary for Medicines, and the Surgeon for
Wounds, sc c.

Pestle.. SNow, how yoq are mistaken again,
don't you think that one Man, being an Apo-
thecary, may understand perfe&ly andsthorowiy
all three parts?

7r. A, Sir, being an Apothecary, indeed, he
may underfand very much, as you fay, especially
if fe be MV n of great Learning.

ttf ie

pefle. Learning? That signifies but little in
this Age, nor (I thank our kind Stars) had ever
less Encouragement; if you but profess your self
an Apothecary, and then undertake any thing
whatever, (as we dare do) no body questions but
that you are an able Dotor, and a good Surgeon,
at any time.
Tr. Very fine, on my Word; And do you think
the World so blind as to believe it ?
Pestle. Faith, Mr. 7rueman, they generally are.
I my feWs have turn'd out several Dofors out of
Families, because they-would not prescribe Phy-
sick plentifully, and in large Quantities. I have
perfwaded my Patients, that they did not well
understand their Distemper; fd have brought in
another who has swingingly dos'd 'urn. I could
tell you of a Sir Harry that paid an ioo 1. for
Phyfick in fix Weeks, and I accepted it,s being a
Friend, without requiring one Penny for my own
Fees.-You don't know the Mystery of Trade.
Tr. In plain Englilh, I know not what you call
Mystery, but I now know the ,Roguery of that
Doaor and you too. What an ioo . in fix
Weeks ? Bless me, What did she take ? I believe
lhe fwallow'd Guinea's made into Bullets for the
Gripes, so difcharg'd 'um again for the Gold-
finders. For I hear Guinea's are grown so cheap,
that Ladies begin to think they can take them
cheaper than Apothecaries Doses.

Pefile. 0 Abominable! 'Do'st hear Brother
Gallypo ? I protest, Mr. Trueman,, you scan Peo-
ples Acions too narrowly. Wou'dn't you have'
us live ? '

7r. The fame Question may be as well ask'd
by an Highway-man, or a Pick-pocket. Live
upon honest Gains, come do, and then it will
wear well.

Pefile,

Pestle. Well, Sir, I go to Sir Thamu, and wait
on you again presently. EExIt

Tr. Nay, if you must be gone, e'en let's all-go
for the present, and discourse the reft over to
morrow. [Exeunt Omnes.

ACT I. SCENE II.
Being the Representation of several

Apotbecaries, weigbig Rich Mens
Brains in their Scales by Scrutples.

Enter Dr. J. Galen and Trueman.
Dr.\ /R. Triemaan, methiihks 'twas a pretty

jVj. Diversion yesterday, to hear the Apo.
thecary brag of his Skill in Surgery and Phyfick,
I could not imagine what he had to set up- With,
but a large Stock of Impudence - I know all his
MIedicines in his Shop did not cost above fifty
Pound, and in fix Weeks time has he made an
Hundred Pound. of one part of it ? Such Re-
tfleions as these wou'd make a Man burn his
Books, and curse the Gentility-of his Education.
It seems indeed awonder to me,thatfo many-Gen-
tlemen who serve in Parliament,.-and have oft-
times many youngerSons to provide for, do not
find out a way to suppress these griping Empi-
ricks and Quacks, that their Children may be
the better able to support the'mfeves in a Gen-
teel Profession, anpfwerable to the Expence they
have been at in their Education.', In troth 'tis a
thing worthy Consideration.

Tr. Truly, Dotor, I am of your Opinion, but
in such Points our English Gentlemen, of what
Sec soever, are generally of the fame Temper

with

with those they call Church of England-Men, that
is, Lazy and flow in profefuting a Publick Interejft
but a&live enough to promote their own private Ad.-
vantage. And this, to give you but one Instance,
is evident enough in the Choice of a Parliament-
Man, where the acive Dissenter generally gets
the Day, because the lazy Church-Man won't'
stir to manage a PublickCaufe, and choose honest
Representatives, tho' his own private Interest
play be often promoted by the Afliftance of such
a Publick Friend.

Dr. We have an English Saying that does a
great deal of Mischief, which is this, That which
is every Bodies Business, is no Bodies Btufnefs. There-
foie I wonder that the College of Physicians don't
Petition the Parliament for a Remedy in this cafe,
and make it their particular Bulinefs.

Enter Tom Gallypot hastily.
T.Gallyp; College of Physicians! What of them
by your leave, Doaor, I think the Company of
Apothecaries very Substantial Men, and are
able to buy twice your College. They 'are
Money'd-Men, and have an Interest almost every
where. College of Physicians! they are Learned
Men they fay, but what's that to Money ? Hah!
Hah! Hah !

Dr. Look you, Mr. Trueman, I suppose you
know this Gentleman is an Apothecary by his
Carriage and rude Behaviour.

Tr. Know him, Do&or, Ay very well; but I
suppose he has been taking a larae Whet this
Morning.

Gallyp. No, Sir, but I ha'n't, I understand the
regulating my Health better than so.; I that
have pra&is'd Phyfick now near thirty' Years,
know better things than Whets, as you call 'urn.

Tr. Nay, Tom, if thee wou'lt have no Excuse
made for thy Uncivility, I have done. Then for

-'*~
~ ought

ought I know, Impudence is as necelrary an In.
gredient to an Apothecary, as Sugar of Pearl for
your Pearl Cordials, with a Pox.

Gallyp. Sir, you are my Patient, so you may
fay what you please.

Dr. I have no Patience to hear this Fellow's
prating.

Tr. Nay, but prithee Doc2or, flay a little
longer.

Dr. I beg your Excuse, I'll wait on you to
Morrow. [Exit.

Gallyp. Let him go, let him go, Mr.Trueman.-.
he's envious of my Parts-for under the Rose, I
can write a Prescription as well as any Dotor of
'em all, I learn'd that the first thing I did, by
reading Doctors Bills in my Shop.

Tr. So, I am glad you own your Inflru&ers.
But, hold, Who is that coming hither so gravely?
What's his Name ?

Enter Retorto Spatula d'Ulcerofo.
Galyp. I can't call him readily to my mind,
but I know him very well by fight. I use to meet
him at Apothecaries-Hall.

7r. Sir, your humble Servant. Pray don't you
belong to the Spanilh Ambassador ?

Retorto. [Stroak4ng hits lhi'skrs] No; Sir, but I
am an Italian born, my Name is Retorto Spatula
d'Vlcerofo ; I was bred in Italy what you call an
Apothecary, by which I attain'd to the Know-
ledge of Phylick, both the Theoretick and-Pra-
aick part: I alfo'exercif: the Art of Chyrur-
gery, as Scarrifying, Cupping, Stupes, Rollers,
and Bandage, 'c. Besides, I can by Chymiftry
extrac the Quinteflence of the Four Elements,
and tame the Red Dragon: And in fine, I can
make up a Cordial, Bolus, or Pills, according to the
bei Mllode in Forrign Countries, as you may fee in-
my Shop in - lane.

Tr.

Tr. H- old, Sir, not too fast; after all,with your
hard Names, I believe you are bred an Outlandish
Apothecary; and they, forsooth, make up things
far better than our Englifi, Apothecaries do
theirs.

Retort. 0, Sir, infinitely better, in my Shop I
Ihould be aiham'd if my Pills look'd not like true
Gold, tho' but gilt; my Soluj's are put up;all in
gilt Paper, cut in fine Shapes and Figures ; a
Quire cofis me 5 s. the cutting; besides the Paper
is pure Venice-Paper: My Cordials are all put
into Venice Vials, &c. and all this Alamodo de
Italiano, to make the Phyfick tape the better,
work the better, and look, the better. O fine
Italians !
Tr. Now you fay something, look the. better;
but to taste the better, or work the better, I
don't well understand Will a Vomit work the
better for being in a fine Venice Glass ? I think
a little Nastiness for a Vomit makes it work the
better. I knew a Doctor that used to stir it with
his Finger, before he gave it, to make it nauseate
the more.

Retort. 0, Sir, that be very unhandsome. No
Englilh-man can do so finely as I can.

Tr. Then I mulf beg your Pardon, I believe
they can all do as well as you pretend; but I
should look on it as a needless piece of Foppery,
if they all should do as you do. And I am sure
the Patient must. pay more Sawce for his Medi-
cines.

Retort. 0, Sir, that's very true; a good Cook
will be well paid for his Sawce, you know Sir.

Tr. A Pox, but this is paying Sawce for the
use of Dilhes, like a young Oxford Scholar's Treat,
if he spends 5 1. in Meat, 'tis odds but he pays
3 or 4 1. for the use of Dilhesand Linnen.

Retft.

Retorti Sir, notwithstanding all this, I never
reckon for a little Bolus above I I or 12 i. made
of very good Diofcordium, very good Gafcoin Pow.
der, and a little Pearl.

7r. No, on my Word that's mighty kind, to
take not above 12 s. for al your fine Drefling, and
a Groats-worth of Medicines. And do you take
any Apprentices ?

Retarto. Yes, Sir, I do, for about loo 1. a Lad.
Tr. Faith, and very well worth it too, and a
great deal of Money saved, if you teach him all
your Trades; for the Devil's in't if one don't hit.
For the Education of a Son, to be a regular
Dofor, is reputed 1ooo 1. Charge at long run.
Any Surgeon of Note will have 2o 1. or more,
an Apothecary 5o 1. or more, a Chymift perhaps
as much. Now if you will teach my Son all these
Arts and Sciences, I think I have a very good
Bargain.

Retort. I'll certainly do it, Sir, never doubt it:
Tr. Well, agreed; Fll fend my eldest Son to
you, and when he is out of his Time, I'll bind all
his younger Brothers to him, so each will have
four Trades or Callings, won't they Mr. Retorto ?

Retort. D'ye doubt it? I thought you had known
an Apothecary better, than to disbelieve him in
his own Calling. Nay, Sir, to be. free with youj
I'll teach you how to multiply Medicines foifai
upon a Patient, that in a Weeks time he shall get
ten Pound in some Cafes, when the Do&or shan't
get above 20 s.

Tr. That's a rare Art indeed, theni I fippofe
you mutt'attack your Patient with a Quadripar-
tite Army of Medicines,drawn frdm all Quarters
of your four Scieinces'

Retort. I can do it, and will; and if you don't
think this enough, here's my Brother Comprehend
five a coming.

'- [Enter

[Enter Comprehensive.]
le can, besides this, teach him to make all forts
of Sweet-Meats, buy and fell Drugs, diftil all
forts of Strong-Waters; nay cut Corns for a need
to Persons of Quality.

7r. 0, Sir, then he is a Corn-cutter only to
Persons of Quality.
Retort. No, not unless he pleases.
Tr. Nor any thing elfe,unlefs he pleases. HovW
ever, I am content my Son Ihall only learn your
four Arts, or Sciences, as you call them. I think
that's enough for One, especially if he learn
throughly the last, that is, to multiply Medi-
cines, so as to get Ten Pounds, to the Dotor's
Twenty Shillings.
Retort. That, afure your Self, I'll teach him
perfetly: For all the Apothecaries in Town,
now, underfland it pretty well; and, I think, I
understand it exceeding well.

Tr. Well, Sir, I thank you for your Kindness;
but I'll fee ye all at the Devil first, to learn how
to swallow Afafotida, before ye shall have the
Education of my Son. I think, if it be possible,
ye have less Honesty than a Lawyer that has but
one Cause in a Year to keep him and his Family
out of-

Compreh. Sir, by your leave, this is not fit Lan-
guage for a Gentleman Apothecary to bear:
He's a Brother of the Quill, and an Honest Man,
I'11 jultifie it. He was Master of the Company
not long ago.

Tr. That may be, and never the honester Man,
if he teaches his Apprentices that Cheat. But,by
your leave, I suppose you are an Apothecary too
by your Talk.Pray, what may I call yourName ?

Compreh. My Name, Sir, is Jack Comprehensive,
originally a North-Country-man, and Brother
Apothecary to this Worthy Gentleman, Mr. Re-

to Ito

torto Spatula dVlcerofo, Apothecary, Surgeon,
Chymift and Doaor. -

Tr. Ay,Sir,his Titles I knew before and pray,
Sir, how many have you ?

Compreb. Sir, I am, in ihort, generally call'd
DoAor only,but I also profess my self aSurgeon,an
Apothecary, I should have said firft,then Surgeon,
Chymift, Druggist, ConfeAioner, Distiller, ic.
And, to Persons. of Quality, Corn-cutter. And-y

Tr. Hold, Sir, pray a little, 'till-I'll take out
my Table-book, left I should mis-call you, and
not give you your right Title.

Compreh. 0, Sir, no matter, Sir, to give your
Self that Trouble, I answer to any one of them.

Tr. Sir, I am glad you do, for fear of giving
Offence. Then pray, Mr. Corn-Cutter of Quality
(that was the laft-Title I heard) tell me, since you
have so many Trades, which of all there were
you bound to sirs ? Or were you bound to 'um
all at once ?

Compreb. Corn-Cutter of Quality! What,could
you pick out none but that ? I told you I was
usually call'd Dotor, and nothing else. I won't
tell you what Trade I was bound to. One would
think you had Sense enough to guess I was an
Apothecary.

7r. Good Sir, pray don't be so angry. How
fhoiild I guess so many Trades to center in one
Man?

Compreb. Then I fee you don't know the Town.
I thought you had told me you had been in Town
above Thirty Years.

Tr. Truly so I have, and have known Apo-
thecaries call'd Dotors, which is but two Names ,
but you are Apothecary, Do&or, Chymie, Di-
ftiller.-Hold,cali my Man to give me my Pocket-
book out of-- ! I have it by. me in my Pocket.
Faith, you must excuse me, I can't remember
all your Titles. Compreh,

Compreh. 'Tis no matter, Sir, remember but
Dot&or, that's enough, I'll answer to that, if you
please.

Tr. Mr. Comprehensive the Apothecary is a better
Name, in my mind it does not please me to call
you Dotor.

Compreh. Then call me what you please; I am
sure some of the greatest Men of the Nation
honour us with that Title, and value our Skill
above a Physician's often.

7r. I am sorry they do; and do think it a great
Fault in our Government, that Men of Liberal
and Ingenious Education--

Enter Pestle and Gallypot,
7r. Now, Gentlemen, I fee ye are all four to-
gether, I'll leave ye a little, and go fee if 1 can
reduce the Docor to a better Temper-- Your
Servant. [Retires only behind the Hangings.

T. Gallyp. Come, Gentlemen, now we are got
by our selves, let's talk a little about Trade;
How stand Affairs ? Is there any Business Itirring?
We ought to have a meeting every now and then,
to fettle what ought to be the Prizes of our Me-
dicines. Pray how do ye at your end of the Town
prize a Dose of common Purging Pills?

Retort. Why, Brother, about Eighteen Pence,
sometimes Two Shillings, with an Hauflyi after
them of Three and Six-pence.

Pestle. And can you live so ? I believe all the
things cost you at least a Shilling out of Pocket.

Retort. No, God forbid! How could I live
then ? Indeed they colt me about Six-pence, and
I take but Five Shillings and Six-pence, some-
times less, and I think that's honest Gains: Hey
Brother !

J. Compreb. 0 very honet ! very fair! There's
nothing can he fairer in the World ! Shall I tell
ye Gentlemen? 1 not long ago had a Patient,

Sss wso

-

who accidentally had a robust heavy Fellow tread
on a Corn that grew on his left Toe, which put
him into some pain. 1 perfwaded him he was a
little Feverish, so blooded him, and apply'd a
Cauflick to his Toe (as 1 told him) to eat out
the Corn: But unluckily eat to the very Bone,
and made a pretty handfom Ulcer. Then I
Blifter'd him, and diftill'd some Antifebrifuge
Drops, Specificks for him only, and good for no
body else besides. In short, he lay ill of this but
Eleven Weeks, and what dost think he wou'd
have paid me for the Cure ?

. Gallyp. Faith, I can't tell, perhaps 4o . But
why didft not call in a Surgeon at last for a dead
Lift?

7. Compreh. 0 Pox Man ! I saw I cou'd do it
my self, iho but slowly. But Faith, I thank my
Stars, I have learn'd now to use them like the
Do&ors, never call in either, but when I can't
tell what to do my self.

. Gallyp. Right, so have I, but what had'st at
lal ?

7. Compreb. What do'te talk of Forty Pound!
Indeed as an Apothecary not above Thirty Pound
a Month, or so, was enough; but as Docor (and
saving thereby many Fees) and Surgeon also, I
askd him but 132 l. 2 s. 8 d. and he scrupled to
give it me.

'r. [Peeps in from behind the Hangings.] A par-
cel of Canary-Birds, now your Rogueries and
Cheats come out.

Retort. Prithee who was that peep'd in and
talk'd so, was it not Mr. Trueman ? Well, I like
that Man's Company very well, were he not too
Centorious upon a Man for getting an honeit
Livelyhood.

7. Galyp. Ay, he is well enough, but he has
that difobliging Rumour in him.

Tr. What a Pox, if I tell ye that ye are Knaves
and Cheats, when ye are so, this ye call a dif-
obliging Humour: Leave offCheating then, and
pra&ise fair in your own Sphere.

Peitle. Cheats, and Rogues, and Knaves! That
will bear an Ation I am sure. Let's at him at
Law, and maul him: Have none of ye a Lawyer
Clapt, or (to speak more modestly) has the High
Scurvy; let us employ him: As we take his
Money, let him take ours: I warrant ye we'll
out-do him in making a Bill of Costs.

7. Compreh. That, Brother, I don't question:
Besides you know, if a Man be a Knave, 'tis an
hard matter to prove him so. Let's put him upon
the Proof of any one Apothecary in Town. If he
should at last prove it, why'tis but one Maungy
Hound in a whole Pack.

Retort. Soft and fair Brother. For suppose he
should prove you, or me, Brother, to be that very
Knave ye talk'd of. Don't venture Proofs. Come
let's threaten him with it, and he'll hold his
Tongue a-courfe.

T. Gallyp. Gad, I won't venture it, not I.
Pefile. Nor I neither. Come let's talk of some-
thing else.

Retort. Ay; Prithee, Brother Comprehenfvetell
me, did'ft abate him any thing of the Bill.

7. Compreh. Yes, Faith, I did; being an old
Customer, I abated the odd 32 1. 1 z . and 8 d.
and took a Goldsmith's Note for the other.

Retort. On my Word pretty well paid too. I
suppose he had a good Estate, and was a Knight
at least. But prithee deal ingeniously with me,
What did it cost thee out of Pocket ?

7 Compreb. Some-body will hear me, or else
I would: I calf it up to a Penny, to fatisfie my
self what really I gain'd by my Medicines.

. GalyP.

.· p
Sss z

7'. Ca yp. No, No, Here are none but Friends,
prithee tell us,l know you deal with Lords,Ladies%
and Knights, who sometimes pay, and sometimeS
not: But when they do pay,befure you mount 'em.

Y. Cormpreh. To tell you the Truth they cost-
Hold look if no body be near us---

ejilte. No; I'll look my self Looks] there's no
body.

7. Compieh. Then, to be plain, the prime Cost
was 6 1. i7 s. 6d.. .or near that: So I got in
the i i Weeks, clear Gains, not above 93 1. of one
Patient. That's all.

T. Gallyp. Wou'd I had half a Score such: I
cannot for the Life of me make above Sixteen
Pound in Twenty clear Gains: I mean, not reck-
oning in my By-Fees of Ten Shillings, and Five
Shillings, or so.

J. Compreh. No! Come that's pretty well too,
confidering you are only Do&or and Apothecary.
But I am Surgeon and Chymift, cc. you know.

Enter Trueman from behind the Curtain.
Tr. Is the Do&or here ?
Al. Yes, Yes, and all run to him to know
what's the matter.

Tr. Hey ! I find ye are all Dotors. O, Tom
Gallypot. go call Dr. Galen, and bid him go to my
Wife, he's fall'n ill again.

. Gallyp. Sir, He'ant at home; Can't I do it?
Sir, 'twill save you Fees.

Tr. How d'ye know he'ant at home ? Go I fay.
I fend for him because I would save Money.
I know last time how I saved Money by you
indeed. -

T.Gallyp. Well, if you will have the Doaor, I'll
wait on him to your Lady. [Offers to go out.

Tr.- Stay a little; now ye are all here together,
I must tell you, with the reft, before you go, that
there was some body behind the Curtain, when

the

the Medicines cost but Six Pound Seventeen
Shillings and Six pence ; and an Hundred Pound
was paid for them.

All. 0 the Devil ! What are we betray'd ?
Tr. Betray'd, d'ye call it? No, But ye have
told your Rogueries and Cheats in private, and
I'll publilh 'em to the World, with my own Sen-
timents about the Pradice of Phyfick.

Gallyp. Ay pray do, so you don't reflec on us;
you use to do things very fair sometimes.

7r. Well, Tom, my Advice to a Patient is, as
soon as he is Ill, to fend for some Do&or of the
Lower Rank, of whose Learning and Skill in
Phyfick he has an Opinion ; and in cafe he grew
worse, to fend for one of greater Fame, Reputa-
tion and Vogue in the World' to join in Consult:
For the Diligence of the one, who has less Fame,
and Vogue in the World (tho' perhaps equal in
Learning and Skill really, tho' not thought so in
the Eye of the World) may, and oft does make
amends for the supposed greater Skill of the o-
ther Physician, by which means the Patient may
more reasonably, and upon juster grounds, expect
a Cure. These, Gentlemen, are my real Senti-
ments.

Gallyp. Now, Master, I like your Discourse
very well, feeing you make no Remarks on Apo-
thecaries. Besides, perhaps it may open Peo-
ples Eyes to employ me the sooner, for tho' I
am an Old Apothecary, I am but a Young Do-
cor. For I visit in either Capacity, either as an
Old Apothecary, which is as good as a Young
Do&or, or as a Young Dodor, and that's as good
as t'other again.

Tr. But I thought you had left off Shop, and
fuck only to your Do&orfhip.

Gallyp. So I do ope!y)', but privately I keep AI Shop,
andfide in all things with theApothecaries againfll

F f f 3 the

the Dodors; I am, and will be to such Families
as yours, an Apothecary frill, that pay well.

Yr. Ay, Tomr, I6l. in 201. is good Gains: Your
Apothecaryfhip, I believe, outdoes your Dofor-
ship.

Gallyp. What, Sir, I believe you heard me jest
a little among the reft. But pray no more Re-
fie&ions, I beseech you.

Tr. Well, I'll fay nothing to you about your
Degree, for to me you are an Apothecary still,
and no other ; to you as such, and to ye all I
direc my Speech, 'tis my Opinion that ye all
ought to be forc'd to take moderate Prices, and
be content with honest Gains.

Pestle. So we are: What would you propoe ?
Tr. In troth, Mr. Pesle, my Proposal will fig-
nifie but little, I know; but were I to advise the
Law-makers, they lhould make a Law, that no
Apothecaries Bills lhould be paid, till first tax'd
by two or more Doctors, appointed in every Di-
iri&, or Division in and about the City of Lon-

Pesle. That's very fine indeed: How is that
Practicable ?

Tr. .Why not ? as well as the Attornies Bills
by tile Prothonotaries.

Pei-'/. That's only when the Client thinks
;imfelif over-rated.

r. So .hould this be, when the Patient thinks
iimfe.f over-rated in iMedicines.

e?.:l. Very fine again: You, and your Poli-
.icks. You would make the Doaor our Gover-
nours, would you ? Good Mr. 7Treman, we beg
'our E.xcuss, we are his Majeity's Free-born
.Subjecs. And after all, pray, Mr. Trueman,
ho.v do the Doctors understand to make Medi-
cines How do they undertand the Prices of
:Dru-s ? nPh, y-ou eC.il 'C know not what. Come

's; ^0
I ;- ::!;,
- *OTr

7r. Mr. Pefle, by your leave a little. How
did all the Apothecaries learn to make Medi-
cines at firit ? The Gentility of their Profession,
I confess, has been a great hindrance to them in
reaping those Advantages as they might (and
with more Honesty than any of ye) otherwise
have done.

Pefsle. E'en let 'em be Genteel still: I don't
them indeed such Fools, as that they cannot-
make Medicines if they will; but why can't they
keep their Learning and Gentility to themselves,
and let us alone ?

Tr. 0, Sir, I am glad you allow 'em to be ca-
pable of learning to make Medicines if they
please. Now, Mr. rfile, to tell you the plain
Truth, I hear they have actually made several
good Medicines at the College, and continue so
to do. Thus they can make Medicines and prize
'em too.

Pefile. How can they tell tho' when a Medi-
cine is good ?

Tr. Very ealie, Mr. Pestle, they have tafte,and
fight to judge by as well as ye.

Pestle. Suppose all this true, tho'l-am refolv'd
I won't believe it true; who, after all, shall give
Attendance to observe the Operations of Medi-
cines ?

Tr. Who should but the Do&ors themselves?
They are paid for Attending their Patients.

Pestle. Hah! Hah' Hah! Attending, I mean
Adminiftring Phyfick; how I fiould laugh to fee
a Do&or giving a Glyfter, and the Bladder break
and bespatter all his Velvet Jacket: Hah Hah !
Hah !

Tr. I find you would be merry at such a Mif-
chance as that; but that's but idle to obje&, be-
cause every Nurse does that Office acourfe, and
all that ye pretend to about sick Persons, or else
are but sorrowful Nurses. As for Bleeding, the

Fs f 4 Su1:

Surgeon ought to be employ'd. As for Chymical
Medicines, the Chymift is at hand ; and so for all
others.

Pes7le. Methinks your Head is full of Projects,
can't you find out one to serve them in ?

Tr. I don't pretend to be a Projetor; but I
think the College would do very well to make all
forts of Medicines themselves, and fell'em out
at eafie Rates. What they design by forming a
Fund by Subscription, I profess I at present know
not; but one of 'em told me't'other day, that
they design to make that a Fund for buying in
Drugs, &c. and making of all forts of Compound
Medicines necefary for the Sick, felling 'em out
again for small Profit, sufficient only to pay about
a dozen Servants, and the Prime Cost of the Me-
dicines, with a Peny in the Shilling over-plus to
the College; by which means the Doctors will be
sure to have such good Medicines, and so well-
prepar'd, as to rely on them not to be fophiffi-
cated; or, for want of any one prefcrib'd, to be
supply'd by another in the room of it, as you A-
pothecaries oft'do: If you han't one thing, you in
your mighty Wisdom will put in another in the
room of it; so that the Physician may prescribe
till Dooms-day, and the Patient will be never
the better, if ye substitute what Medicines ye.
please, and after that put what Prices ye please.

Peis!e. Prices Sir ? I fell as cheap as any Apo-
thecary in Town; I never have above 6s. and 84.
for a Pint of Pearl-Cordial in my Life, an' you go
to that.

T-r. Not so passionate, good Mr. Pestle, I be-
lieve you fell as. cheap as you: Brethren, but all
damn'd dear, and much to the Oppression of the
Poor. To rzmcedy which, they propose to fell a
Pint of good Pearl-Ccrdial for is. 6d. or therea-
bouts: A Cordial Bolus for a Groat, which ye
r-rcko fomi-,.-ic- is- 6d. and ibmetimes 2s. 4

Quart

Quart of Bitter Drink for ir, for which I my self
have paid 5s. and 8d, and so proportionable for
all other Medicines.
Pesfle. Puh ! What if they do ? Our old Cu-
flomers won't leave us.
' tr. What if they do ? Why then the Poorer
fort of People will buy of them, because they are
fare of good and cheap Medicines. The better
fort will think it Prudence to save 5s. in 6s. and
Sd. if they can, to help pay Taxes, and not
have a Bill after a great Sickness brought in,
enough to renew their Sickness again. Even the
Richest of all will be apt to be influenc'd by their
Physicians, when they tell 'em, that they are the
only Medicines prepar'd which they can rely on.
In ihort, every body will be willing in their Ill-
ness to go to such a Place, where they can with
great probability be aflur'd of good and cheap
Medicines.
Pestle. Good Mr. Trueman, .you may e'en prate
about stifling the PraEife of Phyfick till you are
weary, I warrant ye, let em do what they can,
we'll easily persuade People that we are all very
Honest Men. ---We always said you was ever a
prying, bufie, inquisitive Man, pretending to
understand. things I am sure you don't under-
stand; you have a mighty Opinion of your self.
Come let's leave him.

All Ay come, come let's leave him.
C Exit 4 Apothecaries rhistling with Glyfter-pipes.
Tr. 'Tis an old Saying, Si Populms vult decipi,
decipiatur, if People will be cheated e'en let'em
be so. I have done what lies in my Power to
open their Eyes; and by telling the Truth have
gain'd other Mens Hatred: But,

I ne'er to Flatt'ry was, or rill b' a Slave,
He that loves Truth is Generous and Brave,
And scorns the Wealthy and the hbriving Knave.

- '*~ .*~ Exit.

Drt-

Directions to make the Fanaticks Diafcordium
r A K E of the Herb of Hypocrifie and Am.

bition, ofeach'one handful; Of the Spi-
rit of Pride, two Grains; Of the Seed of Dif
fention, Discord and Sedition, of each one Ounce;
Of the Root of Obstinacy, Stubbornness and Co-
vetoufnefs,of each one quarter of a Pound: Bruise
the Herbs, break the Seeds, iice the Roots, and
pound them all together in the Mortar of Vain-
Glory, with the Pestle of Contradidion; put in
a Pint of the Water of Strife; to be infas'd over
the Fire of feign'd Zeal, adding thereto four
Ounces of Syrup of Self-Conceit..

- be Ve- of the Cordil, is;
When 'tis luke-warm, let the Difrenting-Bro-
ther take.one Spoonful of it Morning and Even-
ing, before Exercise; and when his MVouth is
full, let him wink with his Eyes, make wry
Mouths, and -:fed ibome few dilfembling Tears,
and then let him speak as the Spirit of Giddi-
aefs gives him utterance.

The Effei of the Cordial, is;
It will make the Schifmatick maintain the Al-
choran, affltf the Pope to foment Rebellion, and
call it by the Name of SubjeCs Liberty.

This Diafordizum is to be had at every Conven-
ticle in Engl.nd.

Poems
9°

91
POEMS
Upon several c cASIONS.

By Mr. T. BROWNE.
A ?Pafloral on the 'Deatb of . Mary.
SHe's gone! The brightest Nymph that blest

~~~~S [~~Ethe Green.
No more the Beauty of her Eyes is seen.
Who can from Griefs Extremities refrain ?
Or in due Bounds the swelling Tide contain
Who can behold this dismal Scene pass by
With an unmov'd and unrelenting Eye?
London, thou Pride and Glory of our Isle,
Tho' in thy Bosom both the Indies smile;
Oh ne'er forget that unaufpicious Day,
Which thy best Treasure rudely fnatch'd away,
Thy bufie ChanBe be for a Season dumb,
No saucy Mirth within thy Mansions come;
Let all thy Sons in Mourning Weeds appear.
Each Face show Sorrow, and each Eye a Tear,
T' express their Duty, let all Hearts combine,
And on this Black, this fad Occasion join.

Mourn drooping Britain, mourn from Shore to Shore
Thy best belov'd M A R I A is no more.

Ye
__

Ye Beauteous Virgins that in moving Strains
tYere us'd to sing her Virtues on the Plains:
Ye Shepherds too, who out of pious Care, "
Taught every Tree MA R LA's Name to wear;
Your Rural Sports and Garlands lay alide,
This is no time for Ornamental Pride;
But bring, oh bring the Treasures of your Fields,
(That fhort-liv'd Wealth which unbid Nature

. yields)
Th-: -nrninl Hyacinth infcrib'd with Woe,
T - beauteous Lilies that in Vallies grow;
And all the Flowers that rcatter'd up and down,
Or humble Meads, or lofty Mountains crown;
Then gently throw them all upon' H Hererfe,
To these join lasting Bays, and liing Verse.

ourn drooping Britain, mou n fromjhore to flwore,
The best belov'd M A R I A is no more. ' good
Ye dauntless Hearts, that for your Countrey's
All Dangers scorn, and wade thro' Seas of Blood,
In heavy Silence march around Her Tomb,
And then lament'your own and-England's Doom:
For Death has by this single Stroke done more,
Than when (ten thousand llain) he stalks in gore
Ye pensive Matrons, who by Fortune croft, .
In Foreign Fields have dear Relations loft;
Now give a free and open vent to Grief,
Banish all Hopes, and think of no Relief;
That Bounteous Princess, who so justly knew
What was to blooming Worth and Merit due,
Who as Ihe lov'd on Valour still to smile,
Ne'er fail'd to recompence the Soldiers Toil;
Is now ( malicious Fate wou'd have it so )
Hurry'd, alas! to the dark Shades below.

Moourn drooping Britain, mourn from flore toj bore.
T7y be/} belov'd M A R I A is no more.
Ye Mitr'd Heads, and likewise you that wait
Upon the Altar in a lower State,

bewail the Loss of so Divine a Prize,
And open all the Slutes fs your Eyes.
Rome's gaudy Pomps Her Mind cou'd ne'er allure;
Firm to her Word, and in her Faith secure:
The Sacred Scriptures were her daily Care,
Her only Exercise and Food was Prayer:
Where can ye now so great a Pattern find.?
Where can ye meet so bright, so pure a Mind ?
Mourn drooping Britain, mourn from fiore to jforc.
Thy best belov'd M A R I A is no more.
But tho' proud Fate has done her utrrioft spite,
And bury'd all our Hopes in endless Night;
Tho' rav'nous Death has seiz'd the richest Prey,
That ever did a Regal Scepter sway;
Her Name shall live, and still continue fair,
Fragrant as Ricli Arabia's Spices are:
While Albion in Triumphant State shall reign
Queen of the Isles, and Goddess of the Main.'
While silver Thames in wanton folds shall play;
And Tribute to the Britifl Ocean pay;
While haughty Lemis lhall remain abhorr'd,
And William be by all the World ador'd.
Our grateful Tongues her Virtue ihall proclaim
Thro' all the distant Provinces of Fame ;
Still in our Hearts shall chaft MARIA Reign,
Tho' Dead, her Station there the mhall maintain.
Then Shepherds leave at last your mournful Lays,
And turn your Songs of Grief to Songs of Praise,

An

An Epitapb on Mr. Robert Bound,

of Chelmsford in Effex.

EFfare marmor pofJerif
J Juxta 1 epofitum jacet,
Roberti Bound Generofi
Civis Chelmsfordienfis, Cantio eriundi,

Viri integerrimi, Candidiffimi.
In cuj s fuaviJfima confuetudini

Nec facilitatem gravitas,
Nec gravitatem facilita exclufit.
Auram popularem nec ambivit nec fprevit,
Mentis.benB fbi confcie unice follicitw,

In feipfo totts teres 6 rotatndi
Privatam, quam amplexas e/?, vitam

Puhlicis irtutibfs exornavit.
Surnma erga amicos constantid

Erga pauperes charitate,
Erga oinnis benevolentia . fide,
Cum bonis hbice artibm fenefceret,

Miarturu cCelo
DefideratijJimus terris,
Piam animareJfflavit; Nonis Dec.
A. D. M DC XCVI. ctatis LXXV.
Prologue to a M sick Speecb had in tle

Theatre in Oxford.
W
X Ell! for a careful provident Bawd, fay I,
WV VGive me my Mother University:
Bless us ! how neatly has she rank'd you here,
Where drawn in Loves Battalia you appear, ?
The Black,theBrown,the Fair,and the not Fair.)

I

must confess the Cafe is alter'd now,
From what your narrow fulfom Box could how
A Mufick-Room a fitter Name'twould prove,
Call it a Stove, a Bathing-Tub of Love,
Where Sweating Scholar faints, and knows not)
And meltingTallowChandlerdrips hard by,(why>
And all this Heat from Love, or else July.
But now you're welcom hither, in this row
Painting does in its'full Perfection show,
Streter above you, Ladies here below.
Did not such Malice in your Beauties reign,
We yet might hope a Golden Age again:
When Nature taught her untold Tale of Love,
And Paflion from a ragged Gown could move.
But now those Days are gone, and fawcy Art,
Mimick of Nature, ass the noblest part:
E'en Passion is fuccefslefs in this Age,
Unless set off by Love's high Equipage:
The ruffling Pantaloon declares the Flame,
And the well-ty'd Cravat-ftring wins the Dame;
Plain Lovers, like plain Linnen, e'er cafhier'd,
In whose behalk no Point has e'er appear'd:
What hopes then have unhappy we to please,
Whom niggard Stars made not so vain as there.
Alas, we hate your gentle slinking Water,
Loath diftill'd Oils, but those of Mother Nature.
This knew our Fates, and plac'd us in a Town, 7
Where Beauty is so thin, so rarely sown, (down. -
The Nymphs o'th'Fleece,and the three Gates go)
Like homely Peasants, us'd to wholfom Meat,
When Love invites us to your splendid Treat;
We'll gape and gaze, and make no hearty Meal,
Give us our sturdy Beef and Mutton ftili.
But let us not despair, I'll lead the Van,
And tho' I proudly fay't, we Scholars can,
Altho' not as the Fop, yet play the Man.
We'll run at all, and freely take our Lot,
From the fair Walcop, down to foul Bess Scot.

T.e

The Epilogue.
S from a darkned Room, some Optick Glaft
w Tranfinits the distant Species as they pass.;
The Worlds largeLandskip is from far defcry'd,
And Men contracted on the Paper glide.

Thus crowded Oxford represents Mankind,
And in these Walls Great Britain seems confin'd:
Oxford is.now the publick Theatre,
And you both Audience and Acors are;
The gazing World on the new Scene attend,
Admire the Turns, and wish a prosperous end.
Oxford, the Seat of Peace, the quiet Cell,
Where Arts, remov'd from fioify Business, dwell;
Should calm your Minds; unite the jarring parts,
And with a kind Contagion seize your Hearts.
O! may its Genius like soft Mufick move,
And tune'you all to Concord and to Love:
Our Ats, which has in Tempest long been tolt,
Could never reft on so secure a Coast.
From hence you may look back on civil Rage,
And view the Ruins of the former Age:
Here a new World its Glories may unfold,
And here be fav'd the Remnant of the old:
But while yourThoughts on publick Cares are bent,
Past Ills to heal, and future to prevent..
Some vacant Hours allow to your Delight,
Mirth is the pleasing Business of the Night,
The King's Prerogative, the Subject's Right.
Where all your Hours to fullen Cares confin'd,
The Body would be weary'd by the Mind,
'Tis Wisdom's part, betwixt Extreams to fleer,
Be Gods in Senate, but be Mortals here.

An Epitaph upon the Daughter of

'Mr. Robert Limpany.

Hic fubts dormit

Elifabetha,
Roberti atque Ifabelle Limpany,

Filiola fuavifima,
Et, quod fuavitati ipfi pretium fecit,

Vnica.
Hanc Parentum Precibus,
Post OStodecim steriles Annos,
Bonm fero tandem Concefit Dew;
Concefsdm more brevi eripuit,
Inter primos penb amplexts atque amores.
Egregium utrinque Documentum exhibens;

Ne aut de alfequendo
Quodcunqte Votis expetimis Bona,

TemerŽ defperamus Mortales 3
Ne a'acuti etianm ultra modum letemur.
In Lucem venit VI Idus Jan. 69 1.
VI Idus Ot. 1 694. e luce migravit.
Quam eximie olim diligerent Vivam,
Quam acerbe rure defleant Mortuam,

SuperJftes Pater ac Mater,

(Superfiites quidem,
3ed2 cheu, non jam amplius aut Pater aut Mater)

Hoc Narmore teftatum vo(here.

G g g

97
'To

To the Lort Chata cellor in 686.

Hen Catiiine his Country's Fall confpir'd,
W Prest by hisWants,and with Ambition sir'd
When Villains offer'd to reform the State,
Rors saw the Storm, and trembled at her Fate;
Then TIty prop'd the fainting City's Cause,
Curb'd the stiff Faaion, and upheld the Laws:
Charm'd with thefweetnefs of hispow'rfailTongue)
The learned Conul led the gaping Throng:
So Orpheus tanid the Beasts by his commanding)
He not inlarg'd,but he preferv'd the State, (Song.
And 'tis as much to save, as to create:
Hence Statues, to his Fame, the Senate rais'd,
And ev'ry Muse ador'd, and ev'ry Science prais'd.

Such Fame has TuAly by these Methods won,
Nor has your Condu& (Sir) less Wonders done;
Both heard the sturdy Rebels bark aloud,
And both fupprefs'd the Rilings of the Crowd;
But greater Fame is to your Merit due,
You quell'd the fiercer MonIter of the two.

His Tribe at Rorme was of a weaker make,
They rose and fought, merely for fighting fake;
They wanted Prayers to cement their design, 1
And popular Texts to toll the Rabble in,
To harden and confirm them in their Sin.

No pious Business was their great Pretence,
No Good Old Cause, No Qualms of Conscience;
Loud bold Harangues the eager Party won,
And hopes of Plunder led 'em fiercely on:
By no wild Impulse of Religion stirr'd,
Their Lay-men manag'd the poor two-leg'd Herd.

Our Plotters Heav'n into their Quarrel drew,
Soldiers and Priests made up the motly Crew;
Bold crop-ear'd Levites threw the Brands afar,
And made the Pulpit the firt Scene of War.

Thus

Thus our dull Fools, by Gofpel-Cant inflam'd,
Wifely rebell'd, for fear they should be damn'd.
Not thatfam'd BritiflPrince,whofe gloriousToil,
From ravenousWolves,has freed our harmless Isle;
Nor he, that many-headed Hydra flew,
Deserves such a return of Thanks as You;
For Man, when Treason has debauch'd the Mind,
Out-does the Brutalfiercenefs of the Savage Kind.

Time was when Loyalty was a great Offence,
And'twas halfTreafon thought to fenre ourPrince;
Of perjur'd Tools our Fa&ors stood in need,
When Ireland kindly ftock'd us with a Breed,
Bold Sons of Earth,that did three Realms inflame,
Seem'd with frelh Plots, and murder'd where they
So grisly Comets from the Dunghils rife, (came;
Those upitart Scare-crows of the wond'ring Skies:
At length they fled from yourapproaching Doom,
And prudently retir'd to starve at home.

Nay the fam'd Witnefs,thatingrofs'd theTrade,
That the wide Province of Damnation fway'd,
Before your great Tribunal justly fell,
You crulh'd and tam'd that forward Tool of Hell;
Tho' he one Plot cou'd e'en improve to Ten,
And still increase like Falftaf's Buckram-men.

'Tis true, the poor Acknowledgment we rai'e,
Is far beneath the Merits of your Praise;
But even the best, so great these Merits be,
In this Attempt wou'd fail as well as we.
So when there's something to be drawn,where Art
Is at a loss, and cannot aft her part,
Th'unskill'd and Skilful do perform a-like,
And a Church-Dawber's equal to .in-D:ic.

Ggg 2

U on
t.

Uapo Mr. Creeche's Translation of

Lucretius.

I.
L ET not the Thracian Bard admire, (inspire,

Whose pow'rful Strains,and lift'ning Stones
To keep just Measures with his Lyre;
Tho' taught by his commanding Harmony,
The Beasts forgot their native Cruelty,
And to a universal Peace, did joyntly all conspire.

2.
Thy Sacred Hand does more,
That does Lucretius again restore,
Who was a mighty Solitude before;

His rowling Atoms now we fee, $
In Squadrons, and just Measures lye,
Ev'n inConfufion now appears a decent Symmetry.

3.
Nought but a heav'nly Hand cou'd make,
These Atoms their old nothing forsake,

And a true decent order take;
Thy charitable Hand has greater Wonders done,
And has Lucretius his own Errors shown:

Our modern Atheist grieves to fee,
His belov'd Sins so lash'd by thee,
That dost in this deserve ev'n of Posterity;

What Trophies can thy Vicory out-do,
That triumph'ft o'er the present Times, the pafl,

(and future too}

rA Catch.

By Mr. T. Brown.

1.
ET the Woman be damn'd (a moderate Fate)
Or dye an old Maid, as grey as a Cat,
That her Lover refuses for want of Estate.

2.
Let her,that sets Man, like a Beast, to be fold,
And above mettled Flelh, loves a Lump of dead

(Gold,
Look green when she's young, and be pox'd when

(fle's old.
3.
But let those that are wife,contemn the dull Store,
Wives chore by their weight, will be weighty no

(more,
If for gold they will wed, for the fame they will

(whore.
A Parapfhrafe of Horace, of Vides

ut alte.
o I.
THE Hills (you fee) are cover'd o'er
JL With a grave Coat of rev'rend Snow,
And Thames that dd so lately roar,
Fetter'd in Icy Chains can hardly flow;

A fullen Frost the Ground o'erfpreads,
The over-burthen'd Trees hang down their mourn-

2. (ful Heads.
Come then oblige us with a Fire,
'That may fubttantial Warmth inspire;
Tho' now no drinking in the Plants goes round.
But dull Sobriety's in Nature found;
Think not this flall excuse your Beer,.
With Men 'tis the true drinkingSeafon oftheYea:.

G g g 3 S sr

30I

3.
For God's-fake let the Pow'rs above
Their business mind, and govern all below,
If they think fit these Tempests to remove,

No more thall rugged Boreaz blow,
No more the frozen Plants decay,
But smile as they injoy'd a long continu'd May.

4.
To learn your Lot and future State,
Ne'er pry into the Adamantine Books of Fate,

But gratefully those Pow'rs adore,
That added this kind hour to the old Score;

And be content with what is given,
'Tis all the free and voluntary Gift of Heaven.

5-
Ne'er think, in your decling Years,
To pay negle&ed Love's Arrears;
But while fresh Vigour does inflame,
Pursue, with haste, the lovely Game,
Your Talent carefully improve, (Love.
Indulge the Day in Wine, aad spend the Night in

6. .
If now fomeLaughter,or betraying noife,fhe flies,

Will show you where ihe panting lyes;
Then all your store of Rhetorick imploy,
The blushing Dam'sel to injoy;
If she hold out, then steal at least a Kifs,
Or take a Pawn for a more fubltantial Bliss.
A Tra.jiation from Horace, of Mollis

inertia, Feb. 85.

I.
H OW such a Fit of Lethargy

My Senses has posseet,
As if a Dose of Opinz

-_ad buried me in reft.

z. With

2.
With often asking what's the cause

You weary me my Friend,
The Satyrs which I promisd you,

I cannot bring to end.

3.
So poor AnacreZon as they fay,

Bewitch'd by powerful Love,
Complain'd him often of his Wound,

In melancholy Grove.

4.
The Mistress that you court, my Friend,

'Tis fit you fduld adore,
I like a Fool am phryoia's Slave,

Yet know she is a Whore.
A PTanegyrick upon Coll. Geo. Walker.

After the mtnaer of the Trifll.
O U R Gracious King gave him five Thoa-

sand Pound;'
And out of the Rebels Lands,when they are found,
He promises him a Thousand Pound by th' Year,
Which in a short time will unquestionably appear.
Likewise he promises him the Deanry of London-

derry,
When that the Dean of London-derry will die;
But if the Dean of London-derry will not die,
He promises him the Bifhoprick of London-derry.
More of his valiant Deeds and Worth what need

we then to cry-ah,
Since Walker George has made amends for Watk.'

Obadiah?

C gg 4

To Mr. D-- upon his incompara.

ble Ballads, ca'd by him Lyrick
Odes.

I.
T Hou Cur, half French, half Engli.h Breed,
T Thou Mungril of Parnaffs,
To think tall Lines run up to Seed

Should ever tamely pass us.

2.
Thou write Pindaricks, and be damn'd,

Write Epigrams for Cutlers;
None with thy Lyricks can be lham'd

But Chambermaids and Butlers.

3-
In t'other World expe& dry Blows,

No Tears can wash thy Stains out;
Horace will pluck thee by the Nose,

And Pindar beat thy Brains out.

Upon Friend/heip.
HAppy the brace of Souls that do conspire

Against those Tyrants, Body and Desire
Chaft as unthinking Virgins, pure as Vestal Fire.

Of Noble Elemental Flames they're made,
To nothing gross, to nothing mean betray'd;
They give out Men,but-Angels are in Masquerade.

The Forms of Heavy Matter they despise,
in Contemplation all their Pleasure lies,
Themselves they seek; and their own Cotntry of

the Skies.
Together yoakt, so wou'd two Turtles move,
And draw the Chariot of unblemifht Love;
o wou'd they bill and coo, until they root above.

'- .,. But

~~~~~~~.,!.'.

But let our Frolick Prodigals o'th' Gown,
Dive for the tawdry Petticoat alone,'
And Waft Gods Image,to make others of their own

Let their foul Copfcience be written Ill,
Blotted with Woman, and her peevilh Will,
Let am'rous Charms be there in Devilish Chara-

[ers ifill
The Nobleness Nature gave us, The ihall find
Free from the nany Frailties of Mankind;
My Friend and I will sweetly guide each others

[ Mind.
We'll walk, and treat upon some calm delight,
We'll neither wrangle about Wrong or Right,
Quiet Ihallrule the Pay,and Innocence the Night.

And then poor Fortune,what will be thy Ihare ?
Alas! how small an Empire must thou bear!
When we divide each Joy, and leflen ev'ry Care.

Thus liv'd methinks those happy Youth of yore;
Thus Pilades embrac'd his Friend before;
And thus, thus warm'd, Oreltes melts and loves

[ the more.
On a Token ent me ay a Lady.
Kifs'd the Present thrice, and thrice I said,
As Witches do for Lovers that are fled.
Like this kind Medal may the Mistress be,
And then again I kifs'd in Effigie.
Rich is the Metal now, and now Divine !
Unmark'd it scorns to mix with vulgar Coin.
To the dull Lump a Soul Corinna gave,
A Soul unseen, and not to taste the Grave;
When am'rous Jove put on the Lover's Shape,
That woo'd his Danae to a silent Rape;
The glittering Show'r had not a drop like this,
Gingle and Show got him the tawdry Miss;

The

The Man is damn'd to Death, and to Disgrace,
Who ever dares the Royal Stamp deface:
But as the humble Laws have thought it fit,
They are above Reward who have ennobled it.
Methinks I fee her with a genrous way,
Put life and motion in the shining Clay;
I hear how unaffe&ed, and how free
She told my Friend-Let that-be drank for me.
Thus Simile perhaps ( for Poets lye)
The only Charming Fav'rite of the Sky,
From the great Thund'rer big with Baccbug came,
Thus lightned round, and shot a pleasing Flame.
'Twas once disputed which the Strongest were,
The rafie Liquors, or the sparkling Fair:
All now agree it is the Woman's due:;
But, Madam, they must pay their thanks to you.
Each jovial Glass your fair Idea gave,
Brighter than VenYs from a ftormry Wave.

On Flowelrs in a Lady's Bosom.
Ehold the promis'd Land where Pleasure flows
B See how the Milk-white Hills do gently rife,

And beat the silken Skies;
Behold the Valley spread with Flow'rs below,
Other Discoveries Fate let me not share,
If I find out may I inhabit there.
The happy Flow'rs how they allure my Sense,
The fairer Soil gives 'em the noble hew;

Her Breath perfumes 'em too
Rooted i'th' Heart they seem to spring from

Cthence.
Tell, tell me why thou fruitful Virgin Breast,
Why should so good a Soil lye unpofleft ?
Surely rome Champion in the Cause of Love

Has

Has languifh'd here-more weary with the fight,

Then vanquifh'd quite;
While the soft God took pity from above,
And thinking to reward his Service well,
Bid him grow there where he so nobly fell.
So when the longing Cytherea found
The murder'd Boy, who long deceiv'd her Eyes

Under a Flow'r' disguise,
And pluck'd the curious Pofie from the ground:
Fair Cytherea's Bosom look'd like this;
So blufh'd Adonis in the Seat of Bliss.

In Clericos furantes.
JVramenta libens popularia fufcepit Anglw,
J Pinguia ne amittat pafcua nemFe, fapit,
Scote novi renuis jurare in verba Monarcha,

Ne sis. perjurMs; T'u quoque Scote fapis.
Upon the Vintners Adulteration of

Claret.
W' Hat Planet diitraas thee? What damnable

[Star,
To dalh honest Bourdeaux with vile Barabar ?
Why shou'd innocent Claret be murder'd by Port ?
Thou'lt filrely be fentenc'd in Bacchu's Court.
As for us Drunken Rakes,if we hang orwe drown,
Or are decently poifon'd,what loss has the Town?
But to kill harmless Claret that do's so much good,
Is downright efufion of true Christian Blood.
Ne'er think what I tell you is matter of Laughter,
Thou'rt Curs'd for't in this World, and Damn'd

C for't hereafter.

The

The London Vintners A4nswer to

Mir. Brown.
TF what thou asserts, dear Thomas, be true,

' It is to get rid of such Chapmen as you,.
That I and my Brethren have learned to Brew..
Whatever Ingredients we put in the Vat,
Whether Dogs-turd or Hony,no matter for that5
For all our defigins but to poison a Rat.
He that dies by bad Wine,and not by the Halter;
Departs without Chime of Hopkins's Psalter,
And that you well know is no matter of laughterl
A Panegyrick for Mr. Will. Fuller,

upon his fall ~Discovery of the true,
Mother and Birth of the pretended
Prince of Wales.
E ither long loft, or (possibly) ne'er found,
E Mifiaid above, or else hid under ground;
After long Promises for whole Years pall,
silly thy Letters fee the Light at last.
So rare a Piece, 'tis richly worth the Gold
For which tho'fl o'er and o'er the Copy fold.
Now kind Discoverer, tho' long kept hid,
How haft thou prov'd the Birth of this iham Kid ?
You've made all plain by Reason's pow'rful dint,,
A greater Mountain-birth ne'er peept in Print.:
Ay, this will do, or else the Devil's in't. 5

Perhaps some fuarling 7acobites will fay,
They have snail! Faith in thy true Mother Grey.

What

What makes them costive of Believe and duller,
They dare not trust her Oracle Will. Fuller.
What tho' the Critick World perchance miay find
Thy small Veracity to all Mankind.
That's a weak Argument'on this occasion;
Thou may'it set up a Saint-to save the Nation.

Tho' both thy Chara&er and Phiz look odly
To wicked Tories, still they'll please the Godly.
What tho' some Starters at thy Story
May raise Obje&ions up to shade thy Glory,
'en laugh at 'em, dear Boy, as I'll do for thee.
If it be true, as Politicians tell ye,
To hide the Juggle of the Queen's Iham Belly,
Ann to the Bath, and Bishops to the Tower
Were sent, to gain the lucky teeming hour.
,
To forge a Monarch and secure their Pow'r.
But what of this? We need proceed no further
Than the black Story of his own fad Murther.
If, as thou fay'ft, these Machavels to smother,
The dang'rous Birth kil'd its incautious Mother;
(Ah! Butchers Son, fay was it not too cruel
To cut the dear Mams Throat of that sweet Jewel)
Would all the plotting Heads offuch wife Sages
Expose the whole Intrigue to Boys and Pages ?
The very Gallery Pafrage, that dark Scene,
Betwixt the true and the false Mother-Qieen,
Thro' which the new-born Brat mutf make his way,
Unlockt, unguarded, wide and open lay,
And Billy Fuller hapned there at play:
He spies the Pan the new-born Brat convey'd,
And to each Management's a Party made.

Hail Youth! whose Prudence has our Senate led
Thro' Paths obscure as Nilus silver HeRd.
May Iron Bars guard thee from Popish Rage,
And Royal Courts secure the Faithful Page.
Greater Rewards may Publick Faith bestow, 7
Than Dangerfield or Bedloe e'er could know;
Be thou as happy here, as they---below.

A

Poems ipon several Occasions.
AL Lent-Entertainment; or a Merry

Interview by Moondlight, between
the Ghost of MAvius of ancient Re.
n sown, and the City-Bard.
p Hcebits the witty, gay and bright,

Was funk beneath his tedious Light;
And Nature had her Curtains drawn
O'er half the World of Sable-lawn;
The Fairies in the gloomy Shade
Danc'd Minuets, while Hobgoblins play'd;
The weary Clown with Toil oppreft
Renews his Strength by grateful Reft;
Not so the Bosoms of the Great,
Whom Guilt and Cares corrode and eat;
This sweats beneath Ambition's Itch,
And that by Frauds and Rapines rich
T'other profusely wafts his time,
Nay cracks his Brains to get a Rhime;
While variovu Mortals thus contrive
By Blood and FaEions how to thrive;
No smaller Pangs our DoEor seiz'd
How to scan Verfc than cure Difeas'd;
He long implor'd Apollo's Aid,
To save the Sic&, and sing the Dead;
(To him both Attributes are due
Of Poet and Pbyfcian too )
The angry Gpd his Incense burn'd,
And in a Fury from him turn'd.
While the neglected Altars fmoakt,
The Priest himfelfwas almost choakt;
The Bard, funk down with his Despair,
Blafphem'd all Wit, and tore his Hair;
But vet his Folly to evince,
He with King Arthur backt his Prince,

And

And humbly begging both their Aids,
He thus addreft the Royal Shades;

Ye mighty Heroes of your times,
Who cannot die but by my Rhimes;
'Tis too too much that you should frowr,-
Since every Poet knocks me down ;
Goodness waits always on the Brave;
Sure there's no Malice in the Grave:
Where have I done your Honours wrong,
Either in Record, or in Song ?
Alas, 'twas never in my Will,
And 'tis no Crime to have no Skill.

As he proceeded to rehearse
The Hardfljips put upon his Verse,
And humbly crav'd both Arthurs leaves
To pin his Fame upon their Sleeves;
Lo ! and 'twas roondrom to behold
(And can't be without Terror told)
Of huge Size, a Laureat Wight
Came prancing in from Stygian-night:
The wooden Machine at the Door
Neigb'd thrice, in Homage to his Power:
His ghatly Brows with Bays were bound,
The Produ& of fllphureouts Ground!
His Eye-balls like red-hot Bricks,
And in his Hand a Quart of Styx;
S!ch liquid Flames, fuchfolid Fire,
Many would fear, but all admire.
The Bars, and Bolts, and Locks, Oh wonder
All of themselves burfs quite asunder.
When he was to the Bed-side come,
The Bard was struck with Horror dumb;
The gentle Ghost advanc'd his Arm,
And told him, Brother, there' no harm;
Come, thy dejeted Spirits cheer,
Who sings of Heroes Ihould not fear.

He

He wipt his Face, and trembling said,
I was furpriz'd, but not afraid;
Those verdant Bays that crown your Brows'
Your Candour, and your Goodness shows;
Poets are harmless, gay, and kind,
And shou'd be to each other blind .
Since you are then a Son of Fame,
Forgive my Freedom-What's your Name ?
Thofcoundrel Poets here harass us,
You look like Prator of ParnaffJ ;
And since a Bard of t'other World,
More Goodness has you hither hurl'd,
And you to my Afiftance come,
To supersede my rigid Doom,
You know, wife Sir-Yes, very well,
Quoth Spright, that you're the News of Hell,
The Scandal of the Rhiming Crew,
I blufjl to have been rankt with you;
iMy Rhimes with me were long since rotten,
And, but for Arthurs, quite forgotten;
In your curs'd Poems I revive,
And now again in Scandal live;
Pray what has poor Habakkuk done,.
Thus to be lafit in your Lampoon ?
His Chara&er you shou'd have spar'd,
He was a Prophet not a Bard.
Fob too does in your Poems latnguih,
And fdffer almost hellijh Anguish.
Were he now living, and thy Theme,
He cou'd not help, but must bla/pheme.

Sir, by your Favour, quoth the Bard,
Your Censures are unjust and hard;
I've done them Honour, as I think,
Or let my Name for ever stink.
Why that's most certain, quoth the Spright,
And thou'rt a Coxcomb, by this Light;

So

So empty, senseless, and so dull;
Thou'rt every School-boy's Ridicule.
Adamn'd Reproach to Verse and Prose,
As well as the Cailenic Dose.
What ! faith the Doator, in a Fury/
I no Physician! L---I alure you
D;Jeafes run from me affrighted;
My Skill's so great, that I am Knighted
Such vast Discoveries I have made
Throughout the Efculapian Trade,
The Cits applaud, their Wives adore,
My numerous Verse, and Medic Porwer.

Come, thon'rt a Scoundrel, quoth the Ghof.R
Of Wit and Cures alike you boast.
Know, I am tMvius, that of old,
In Thoughts sublime, and Matter bold,
Did every versifying Ass,
By a Bar's length, at least, surpass;
And bnly am out-done by you
In lofty Noise and Nonsense too.
Then M&vius tore his wither'd Bays,
And threw'em in the Doaor's Face;
Who, being fcar'd at such a Scene,
Has promis'd ne'er to Write again,
An Epigram out of Martial imitate'd,

Book 3. Epig. 54.
I R Fopling, you're a Man of Faihion grown
S The most accomplifit Blade in all the Townm
'Tis all the Ladies talk; but tell me this,
What a fine Man of Mode and Falhion is,

H h h Tis

'Tis he that's all the Morning at the Glass, I
To put each Curle in its molt proper place,
And in affeced Forms to set his Face.
That smells of Essence, and the best Perfume
Which does from India or Arabia come.
That when one speaks (as if he did not hear)
Hums o'er some wanton'Song, or modifn Air.,
That Legs and Arms in various Postures throws;
And seems to dance at every ftep he goes.
That fits among the Women in the Pit,
And that he may be thought a Man of Wit;
He whispers to the next as to a'Friend,
Then in loud Laughter' does his whifp'ring end.
That reads and writes Love-Letters to and fro,
And does each Gallant's Wench and Mistress

C know.
Who, tho' unbidden, is a conltant Guest,
At ev'ry Mask, at ev'ry Treat, and Feast,
But fits in pain for fear the next should stir,
And so displace his Dress or Garniture.
Who knows Newmarjket breed' o well, that he
Can tell you yack-a-.andy's Pedigree;
And down from long descent pretends to trace
The famousSwallow's, or fleet Dragon's Race.
How Sir ? what's this you fay ? Is this Buffoon
Admird so for a Spark throughout the Town ?
Believe me, Sir, on Earth there cannot be
A more ridiculous trifling Thing than he.

On 'Womians Levity.
A Fragment out of Petronizs.
T Rulr thou thy Ship to Sea and Wind,

1 But not thy self to Woman-kind;

For

For the unconftant Wind and Sea,
Are faithfuller by far than they.
All Maids are treacherous in their Love,
And if by chance one contant prove,
I know not how she e'er could be
Made conflant from Inconfancy.
A Frtag ent out of Petronius zmit-

ted) begihnsng thuS--Quifquis ha-
bet nummos, ac.
1r HE wealthy Lord thro' Storms at Court
L [- may fail
Into Preftrment.with a profp'rous Gale.
On Honour's gilded Pinacles may-'tand,
And have the World, and Fortune at command.
He by his tempting Gold's Almighty Charms
Gan bring a Queen, or Princess to his Arms;
And bribe her Father, thp''a Kiig, like yove
With a bright lhow'r of Gold to grant his love.
He can be Lord-Chief Justice, Cponfellor,' )
Can grace the Pulpit, and adorn the-.Bar, -'
And foil the greatest Rook at IfeJJmnfier. '
.He with nice Art the choicest Verer can write,
Can baffle Dry den and .the Men of Writ:
The Matchlefs'CowTey and GreatWeller seem
Rude, and unpolifht, when compar'd to him.
If you have Wealth, you may do what you please,
The Judge or Priest your awful Nod obeys;
All firait your Skill, and mighty Learning own
And you're a St-- t, or Pem'beitoa.
All things obey your Gold, and you may have
Whate'er your wanton Thoughts or Wifhcs crave
You of all Pow'r and 'Grandeur are pofleft,
Have Heav'n and Jove himself too in your Chest.

Hhh2 A

A Fragment out of Catullus to Lesbia.
H Appy the Man! thrice happy he,

And equal to a Deity.
He, if it founds not too too odd,
Is greater far than any God;
Who fits and hears, and fees you, while
You sweetly speak, and sweetly smile.
As soon as I my Lesbia fee,
My Senss all depart from nie.
Nothing about me is secure,
From Love's and Lesbia's mighty Pow'r.
My faultring Tongue now cannot speak;
My Heart swells up as it would break,
Each Vein is with her Love poffeft,
And gentle Flames glide thro' my Brealt,
My Ears ring with a fancy'd Noise,
My Soul faints with excessive Joy;
My swimming Eyes grown dull of fight,
Are clouded with a double Night.
Thy Sloth hath done this injury,
Catullus it has ruin'd thee.
Too much you wanton in soft ease,
And that, alas! too much does please.
'Twas Sloth rich Cities first o'erthrew,
Deitroy'd both Kings and Empires toco

SonT
lI6

i17
Song, set ly VDr. Blow.
O perjur'd, and if thou e'er return
G To view the small Remainders of my Vrn,
When thou halt laugh at my religious Dust,
And ask, Where's now the Colour, Form and Trust
Of Womens Beauty ? And perhapswith rude
Hands rifle th' Flowers which the Virgins ftrew'd
Know I have pray'd to Pity, that the Wind
May blow my AJhes up, and Itrike thee blind;
A 'Pensive Thought at the Rose-

Spunging-houfe in Woodftreet,
and left there by T. Brown.
T'0 N adverf, videns me fraEtum fata coAr-
N* , EumO
Carcer corpw habgt, mnen coaperta volat.

Cafimire, Ode 23d. Book 4th.

To the Grafjopper.

I.
Left Epicure of Race Divine,
B Who, drunk with Heav'n's dewy Wine,
On some cool shady Tree dolt fit,
And sing upon the top of it;

Hh h - WhilSf

W'hilst with the cheerful Mufick of thy Voice
Thou mak't thy self, and silent Woods rejoyce,

II.
Iow since the tedious. Winter's pait,
And welcome Summer's come at'laft
' (Which with fivift Wheels still hurries on,
And still is eager to be gone)
Chide the Sun's.halte,wiith Mirth the dayprolong,
MIake Phebius itop his Course to hear thy Song.

III.
As the moit happy glorious Day
Just brings it self, and thews us joy;
So Bliss but similes on us, and tlen
Scatches it self away again:
Our empty Joys too fleeting still appear,
But solid Griefs too long and tedious are.
Algerno n Sidney's Let-ter of Advice

to hh Fried, cozcernii the Edu,
cation of his Soz. By T. Brown.
Sincc 'tis your only Study and your Care,
J How. to difi)ofe of Bob vour Son and Heir,
I'll give VCu my Advice, Sir, in this grand Affair.5
If :lU5s Ingenious, and a Boy of Parts,
Co inot dlebach him wvith the Lib'ral Arts:
Those jilting Whores, instead of Silk and Satin?
EquiptL ia Linfey-woolife, Greek and Latin, .
W\ill ifoi his Fortune if they once come at him.)
E,:t if he is Mercurially inclin'd ;
Oif Vitr fagacicus,. and Heroic Mind,
He'di befl pursue those ihonourable Conrfes
Of picling Pockets, and of taking Purses;
Ana iil p:-efcribe the Lad a safe a;nd true Gate,
i'.c7 o Z.-ic
t dr, a, d PI t h to Nen.xgt -t

*!I l

LefR bloody Jqdge and Jury should transport
The Boy to Tyrbun-Send him to the Cohrt,
Where in a Fortnight's time he'll learn his Cue,
Under--
To pick the Pockets of a Free-born Nation,
In fiunifhing two Dihies for Collation;
Like learned Cqoks, as all Men grant they are,
To make the self-same Sauce to Peace and War.
What better are we for this boarted Quiet,
If we myft pawn our Birth-right for our Diet ?
But since it is by Providence decreed
That Liberty and Property must bleed,
This only. Comfort will their Sufferings ease,
That, like good Christians, they depart in peace.
You cannot, Sir, do better for your Lad
Than bind him an Apprentice to tIiis Trade:
The King's. his'Surety, and will not neglet him,.
But with a S,tanding-Army flill proted' him.
Yet if Bob's Talent lie not in his Brains,
Make him a Parson, Neighbour, by all means
His Road unto Preferinent, Sir, is chalk'd,
In all my Life I ne'er knew Blockhead balk'd:
As rankest Weeds in richell Soil are found,
So Spiritual Hemlock thrives in Holy Ground:
The Church and State, like Sharpers, cry out

(halves;
One claims the Fools, the other all the Knaves.
Thus, Sir, I've shown you how your Son may rife.
But do as feeneth good in your own Eyes:
For if your Englih Stomach can't digest
The rav'ning Courtier, or the Jackal Priest,
Teach him your self, and let the Sol inherit
His Father's Acres, and his Father's Merit.
'Ere Senife, that like AztYora, does make way
For brighter Reason, the ensiling day.
With Noll's great Image fill his dawning Soul,
His Fancy flatter, and his Judgment rule ;

Hh Mah4y

May's Afions suit unto his Country's Fame,,
And keep the Rebel in the EngliJb Name,
Let him, like me, atl Monarchy oppose,
And pluck the Idol by his 2Roman Nose.

Tour Servant,

Algernon Sidney;
P. S.
Your old Friend Mr. Ludlor's in good Health,
And hopes to live to fee a Commonwealth.

On ~Dr. Sherlock.-
R Egibus obfequium dum binis obligat unum,

Yurat utriq; Vnam prodit utriq; fidem.
Quid mirum ? Sijit semper jurare paratus,

Cum per quos jurat, tres habet ille Deos,
The fame Allegiance to two Kings he pays,

Swears the fame Faith toboth, and both be-
No wonder if to Swear he's always free, C trays.

That hath two'Gods to swear by more than

we.
On the Oxford Almanack, for 1702,

An quiodlibet fit ex guolibet.
UV M frnulachra notat pifios Jgnantia faftos,
3 Ddales luftrans Zoilus artis opus;
Cornrmeta arcane fibi deprendilc tabelle

;~iis, F obicutros sxpliciffe dols ;

' ~
* -
' r'-

En ! Cives, pilura loquax, prYroga malorurm,

En ! que Saxonibus fata minantur ait.
Hic grandi affurgit pompa venerabile buflumr

Relliquiarq; tenens urna, yacobe, tuas!
Hic luce effulgens, pofitoq; Britannia luItu,

/fpicit exultans CGfaris ora novi.
Dum folii infelix rivalis, meftus &f exfpes,

Volvitur, inq; imas pracipitatur aquas.
Selgicus inde Leo-quin tu damnabere flammif

Impia Niliacis, fata tabella notis !
0 Cerebrum felix! Et divinare peritum !

0 lepidum ingenii luxuriantis opus!
Ouin pergas, bone Vir, nondum extricata latefcit

Materia auguriis plurima digna tuio:
,Mate fagax repete examen, que prebuit unum

Chartula figmentum, Zoile, mille dabit.
On 5Dr. Garth's Sickness. 170o.
1 /,fAchaon lick! In e'ry Face we find
MI/1 His'Danger is the Danger of Mankind,
Whose Art prote&ing Nature can't expire
But by a Deluge, or a general Fire.
More Lives he saves than perish in our Wars,
And falter'than a Plague deitroys, repairs.
The bold Carouser, and advent'ring Dame,
Don't fear a Fever, or refuse the Flame:
Safe in his Skill from all restraint set free,
But conscious Shame, Remorse or Piety.
Sire of all Arts! Defend thy darling Son,
Restore the Man whose Life's so much our own,
(On whom, like Atlas, the whole World reclin'd)
And by preserving Garth, preserve Mankind.

The

THE
London and Lacedemoinian Oracles.

1Written by Mr. T; B R o w N.
In which he undertakes to nfivez dll Witty and

I,?rge;io: f QteSftions, for the Diversion a. well-
as SatisfaRion of thp Curiors.

The INTRODUCTLON.
.t Ar N 'iht beiig very restless in my Bed, Ithougbh
_, fit to divert tle timie ritl Sporting ant Author,
re membcring that of Perseus, Noaturnis juvat im-
pallefcere Chartis: The fifr Book I laid my hand
cr), proved some feleEt Comedies of Aristophanes;
tri.':rg t;hem over, my Eye staid on that place in his
Co3;a:rdy of Cloud!, wilere he brings in Socrates and
Chareplon. meaifring the leap of a Flea from one's
Beard to t'l ',ers; I aIn!g'd i heartily at the Fancy,
rrT I/ soon forgot t.e In ;uietude of the pat Hours,
,nd refolv'd to fjciid th7fe to core with more Satis-
r.cteio, by readi;:g the ,whcle Comedy over, which by
rh.:t time I had done, it grew tow.ard Aforning, 4nd
zh; t made ime tiink of tal'ng a rejereJling Nap to keep
.,- Body ;in' its dute Temper; bzut the Wit of' rifto-
i-.":ncs Lad ban.if;id S!eep jrom nmy Eyes, filing my
,i;t w*ith a thouJand plealant Fainies, till Fortune,
'.,: : ' H
.ca.e of .:)y IHeaB.l, :.d, b)' I lnow not what

rmeanS,

means, laid one of those Papers, call'd the Athenian
Mercury, by me, beinig deftitz!te either of Opium or
Poppy-Water. I had scarce run over one Para-
graph, when I found a Heavincfs descend on my Eyes,
the ielcome Harbinger of approaching Slumbers, which
son ffolloro'd after. The Mrercury had no sooner per-
form'd its Office, but I found my self entertain'd wPith
this Dream or Vfion. Who Jhlould come to me but
Aristophanes in his own proper Person, I having me-
thought that Comedy in my Hand which I had jzlj
before perused, flie jewed me a Thoufa: d Beauties I
had passed over unregarded: From thi:s he paj''d to
enquire of me the News of the Town, I mean not as
to Affairs of State, or any of the zrpicafant wAsovc-
ments of the Body Politick, but as to what related
to the Beaux Esprites, the Men of Thoiuht and
Ovei-.thought, the Brothers of the QOill and the lice.
,1bhither the Soul of the Virtuof's of o!r Age were
agreeable to that of his Socrates, &c. I afitr'd him
the very fame extravagant Whims were still in beingr
and every day reviv'd Anaxagoras his AIountains,
failleys and Drwellings in the Mo oon, rcre now form'd
into regular and difJtin~ Countrics, and we were as
well acquainted with that Planet, as Diogenes with
his Tub; that we had not made large Discoveries
there, but had also many a laboriott Trifle to exalt
the Earth among the Planets too. That if the fame
Anaxagoras held the Sun to be a piece of burning
Iron no bigger than the Morea, we had some nor
long ago that were of oFpiion, that it was fallen I
lznow not how many thous.nd Mile nearer the Earth
than it was in his time. Tou 2were not the only People
(said I to him) that zveie so happy as to be admitted
to the Knonredge of the Plurality of Worlds by De-
mocritus 3 we have since dividedthem into their
several dzijti'in Classes and Turbilions. lNay, if your
Poets borrow'd from your Philosophers fJme of their
SyJfems to gdc irn their Wt'ork., our Modern Philosophers

have

have found out Secrets of Nature in your Fables
worth the reducing to Pracice. As that of Medea's
rwnewing the Touth of Efon. I confess we were not
so successful, but the reason was, because we rather
followid her Precription to the Daughters of Pelias,
than what fie practiced her self. Here methought the
Poet could not forbear Laughing heartily : We have
had (continued I) Pumps, Looms and Machines
which you never dreamt of in your darker days; and
the Virtuoso's of the Athenian Society have found
cut, that a Tunnel revers'd is full as good for the
Eyes as Spegacles. Athenian Society (interrupted
le) fay you, why is there any of that 'Nationyet'in
being, whose Noddles are cast in the fame projecting
Aould they were in my days. I find that our Cor-
rejpondence was false then, that gave an account that
the ]Kingdom of PhiloJophy, rhich made such a Splut-
ter there in my time, was drindled down to the honefi
MA'echanicks and none apfired higher than his Trade,
or the kzowledge of a Country Pedant. Or'have the
Ancient Race tra.nimiirated to these happy Isles, to
ss.c all run Mad1 with Whims and Nonfence, with
a Girae Magiifterial Face ? No, no, my jovial Poet
(ret'urn'd I) rtefe are only a company of unknown
namelcfs Vnderta.ers, who pretend to answer all Que-
rics a,:ich are sent them from all Degrees and Qua-
tit esj from tle Prince to the Peasant; but parti-
cu.:!rly filich a are sent by the Fair Sex, for whom
they, haive a mofr profound Veneration, that is, from
the L.ady in her coc&'d Commode, to the Oyfter-wench
in her la.'s l Occ::pation at the Tavern-door. But
thy (iter,-uted kh) do they call themselves Athe-
nians ? I ktio not (-eturn'd I) unless it be by the re-
fc-inblwce tlhes ha-e to a certain Bird, for which that'
';:ym' ,:. famom of ore ; tbo' by the Vigour and Force
o h bc;ir ,i7rcon the modest Centlremen aimed not .so
'*- ', .'i ) 'e :...: iths mjelves to the Birds of Minerva,
i<:: o,' ; :,tli'; -id '
; t: ,lsdei-i Athenians, selecting

the

Ite filly and trifling Queries of the Blue and Green-
Apron Men, and casting .aftde all the Ingenious and
Witty, as alien from their Design and Purpose ; for.
which, when they are reprimanded, they think it fuffi-
cient wifely to answer, That they who sent those
Queries, thought them as wife as any: As if be-.
cause every Fool thinks his own ProduiF fair, that
therefore there is no real Difjintkion betwixt Wit and
Dullness, but the fond Opinion of the Person con-
eerned. Thus,when the Ingeniou Mr.de la Cross dif-
cover'd in one Supplemont about 40 or 50o rof Faults
in both Words and Sentences, this Grave Afembly fay
for answer, that a Dafir of a Pen will mend them.
So many Dajhes (interrupted he) would but disfigure
the Paper, and therefore I am of Opinion that the
Fire would do it more to the purpose. These are the
wretched Answers they give (purfied I) and pre-
tending to gratifie the Learned World, weekly bufie
the Press with Impertinent OueJtions of Apprentices
and Chamber-maids; and inJfead of enqriring into
the Solution of Witty and Yudiciotm Points, relating
to History and Philosophy, whbich have been Jent them,
they have everlastingly jtuffed their Papers with Re-.
ceipts for Flea's, &c. and such-like Wife LeEures.
There 'was a little after my time (said Arifftophanes)
when the Itch of Scribbling grew more common, and
diffused a damn'd Blockhead ofa Poetaster in Athens,
named Choerilus, who writ the Athenians Viltory
over Xerxes, and the noble Ats of Alexander the
Great, but out of all his voluminou Crambo's, there
were but seven Verses that would jtand the T ft of
reading, and for them he receiv'd seven pieces of
Gold, but for every one beside a Buffet on the Face,
which amoiunted to so plaguy a number, that he could
not fee out of his Eyes for a Twelvemonth after, and
forswore the horned Hill of Parnassus, as a more in-
hospitable place than the Mountains of Caucasus,
I is pity that you that pretend to improve all that

was;

7PAS good among us, fliould want some such Punijfl2
ment for thore Scoundrels that preefume to Scribble in
spite oftheir Stars; and I desire, in the Name of all
the Old, that these Neri Athenians may be regulated
according to that laudable Custom of our days. I per-
fwaded him this Punijbment would be too severe, ince
for ail their Buffets they would not have one piece of
Gold. But to find out A. Punijiment more agreeable
to our times, I thought the Jetting uip a Ouery-Office
in opposition to theirs, would mortifie them as much,
,t the Office of Inifurace from Fire by the Friendly
Society, did that of Barebone; he .was satisfied of
the Equity, as wTell s Reasonableness of my Resolve,
and desired me to tiferit these followizg QIeries to
his felf-adopted Country-men, that he might imploy
them as well as he had his Socrates and Chxrephon.
Query. J THat was the Opinion of the Ancients

¥ V about the Soul?
AiJnv. Their Opinions were almost as Various
as their Persons, and many of them as Absurd as
others are Wonderful; some thought that the
Soul perifh'd with the Body; some, that tho' it
a great while out-liv'd the Body, yet it had its
period, and once ihould be no more; others ar-
riv'd by the force of Reason, to a presumptive
Knowledge of its Immortality: .Some took the
Soul to be nothing else but the Heart. EmFe-
docles held, that the Soul. was only the Blood that
incircled the Heart ; some would place it in the
Brain, or at least would have the Brain its chief
Seat or Throne; these Opinions found Opposers
of such as held only that all this was false., with-
out establishing any Truth in the place of these
f.,ppofcd Errors they pretended to remove. Zeno
the Founder of the Stoicks held, that the Sou.
was a Fire, perhaps borrowing his Opinion from
that Fable of the old Poets of Greece, who made

Prim°rt he?::

prometheiu steal Celestial Fire from the Chariot
of the Sun, to give Life and Motion to that Image
le called 'Man, for it was no better than an
Image,. when Pallas was so taken with his Inge-
nuity of forming it, as to profer him any thing
in Heaven for the perfecing of his Work. But
'methinks there is nothing more pleasant, than
the Fancy of Ariftoxenu, who being aMufician
as well as Philosopher, would needs have the
Soul nothing else but a certain Harmony. pro-
ceeding from the well-difpofed Motions of the
Body, like the proportioned Notes in Singing,
and InftrumentalMufick; tho' perhaps one would
imagine, that Ariftoxenaw had a mind to put a
Complement upon his Diversion, and make the
Philosopher truckle to the'Mufician, yet he only
reviv'd that Opinion which was long before de-
liver'd by Plato. Xenocrates, tho' he denied that
the Soul had any Form or Body, yet contended
that it was Number, the force of which he thought
to be very great in Nature, as Pythagoras had
maintain'd before him: His rafter Plato sup-
posed a Threefold Soul, the principal part of
which, as the most honourable, he placed in the
Head, that is Reason; from which he Separated
two other parts, Anger and Desire; Anger he
placed in the Bosom, and Desire beneath the
Midriff, betwixt the Heart and the Lungs.
Dicearchos will needs have it, that the Soul is
nothing at all but an idle empty Name, and that
the World is much in an Error, to use this di-
ftin&ion of Animal and Inanimate Beings, inAce
neither Man nor Beast, nor any thing which
comes within the Notion or a Living Creature,
has any Soul; and that the Pomer by which we
move, think, or do any think, was equally difafed
through every living Body, nor by any means
separable from it, since it was nothing but one

indivisible

indiviiible Eflence with the Body so made, as by
the Benefit of Nature it should live and Think.
Arifrotle,.the greatest of the AncientPhilofpohers
(tho' Cicero always prefers Plato to him) after he
had confider'd those other four inds, from
whence he deriv'd all other Beings, supposes a
fifth Nature, the Origine of the Soul or Mind;
fir to think, to provide for Events, to learn, to
teach, to invent some things, and remember many
more ; to Love, to Hate, to Covet, to Fear, to be
Troubled, to Rejoyce, and things of this Natuie,he
cannot conceive to be in any of those four Kinds.
So that he advances a fifth Kind without a Namne,
and therefore calls the Mind or Soul (by the new
Name of) 'T"rvW.-C,Y as it were a continual or
perpetual Motion. I think I have enumerated
.all the Opinions of the Soul, except that of De-
mocritus, who makes the Soul, as well as all things
else, be conpofed of the Fertuitous Concourse of
Atoms.

Plutarch and Stobeus fay,that Thales first affirm'd
the Soul to be d:-c:'ty.n'Y a felf-moving Nature.
Arifiotle [de Aiuma liber cap. 2.] calls r.v.i'yov in
refpe& to the Motion it gives to other things,
in which are included both the parts of the Pla-
tonifts ' A Substance having within it self a power
to move it jelf and other things. This Opinion first
raised by hales, was entertain'd in the Schools
by Pythagoras, Anavxagoras, Socrates &c. till ex-
cluded by Arifiotle. Thales held that the Load-
s~one and Amber had Souls; the first, because it
-draws Iron, the second Straw. He farther asserted
those things we count Inanimate to have Souls.
He was the first, according to Cberilyus, that held
the Immortality of the Soul of Man, learning it
from the Egyptians.

Some fay Phcrecydides first asserted the Immor-
tality of the Soul. Ana.ximines held that our

Souls

Souls, by which we live, are Air. Anaxagoras held
that the Soul is that which moveth, that it is Aeriatl
apd has a Body of the Nature of Air, and that
it dyes as well as the Body.

Socrates held the Soul to be Immortal, proving
it with this Reason, what is always moveable is
Immortal, but that which moveth another, or
is moved by another, hath a Cessation of Motion
and Life; that the Soul is pre-existent to the
Body, endued with Knowledge of Eternal Idea's,
which in her union to the Body ihe loses, as tfupi-
fled or in a Dream, till awakened by Discourse
from sensible OhjeAs; thus is all her Learning
only Reminiscence, or a calling to mind her first
Knowledge. The Body being compounded is
dilfolved by Death; the Soul being fimple,pafleth
into another Life incapable of Corruption. The
Souls of Men are Divine, to whom when they go
out of their Bodies, the way of their return to
Heaven is open, which to the belt, and the molt
just, is most expedite. The Souls of the Good
after Death, are in a happy State united to God
in a blefred inaccessible place, the Bad in conve-
nient Receptacles susser condign Punishment.

Heraclitus fays, That the Nature of the Soul
is so profound, that it cannot be found out by
any means, he only aferted that it is as all other
things are, an Exhalation; that which is within,
and that which is without, being all of one Na-
ture, it is Incorporeal, and always in Fluxion,
that its being m6ved is Self-evident of Souls, that
the Dry are the wisest and best.

Xenophanes held that the Soul is a Spirit, and
that there were many things beneath the Mind,
Protagoras held the Soul to be nothing more than
the Senses.

Epicurt conceives the Soul to be Corporeal,
some moot teiuious or subtile Body, made up of

I i s oft

most subtile Particles; he was of Opinion, that
those that held it Incorporeal abused the Word,
and play the Fool exceedingly; for except it
were such, it could neither as nor susser, and
not be touched by any thing, but would be as a
mere Vacuity, which is such, that it can neither
as nor susser any thing, but only affords a free
Motion to Bodies palling through it.

Now that the Soul ads and suffers something,
is manifestly declared by its Senses and Affefions,
as also by the Motions by which it impels the
Members, and from within governs the whole
Animal, turns it about, transports it into Dreams,
and in general, by its union and consent, mix in
one Compound with the grosser Matter, which
usually, upon this occasion, is more particularly
term'd Body. He calls it a molt tenuious Body,
for that it is made up of the molt tenuious and
molt subtile little Bodies, which as they are for
the most part exceeding smooth, so are they very
round; that the Sense is the Soul of the Soul.

Diogenes held the Soul to be Air, and Hippo,
that it was. Water. What other Opinions of the
Ancients there may be of the Soul, they are re-
ducible to some of these.

Query. A certain Ouerift of the Fair Sex, being in
great dcubt what to do in this following cafe, desires
rAhe Anfjer of her humble.Servants the Athenians ?

Aniro.She having by Nature a Constitution that
i; so abundantly ftock'd with LO.VE,that the can-
not contain, but a Face and Person that scares
all Men from making any Address to her, is ex-
treamly troubled in mind how she shall comply
w.ith God's First Commandment, Increnfe and
Multiply; unless some of the Members of that
Society will cast a charitable Eye of regard on her,
if so, we shall take care to give them exact Di-
rerions to find her out.

Queryc

Query. What is Scepticism ?
Anfiwer. 'Tis thus defined, A Faculty opposing
Phenomena's (or Appearances) and Intelligibles all
manner of ways, whereby we proceed through
the Equivalence of contrary Things and Speeches
first, and Suspension then to Indifturbance; we
call it a Faculty from the Power thereof: By
Phenomena's we understand Sensibles, which we
oppose to Intelligibles,thefe words all manner of
ways may be referr'd to Faculty or Power limply,
it may likewise be applied to Opposition betwixt
Phenomena's and Intelligibles, since we oppose
them several ways, Phenomena's to Phenomena'.,
Intelligibles to Intelligibles, or one to another;
wherefore to include all Oppositions, we fay all
manner of ways, or all manner of ways of Pheno-
mena's, and Intelligibles, not inquiring how Phe-
nomena's feem,or how Intelligibles are understood,
as taking them limply. By contrary Speeches, we
mean not only Affirmation and Negotion, but
limply those which are repugnant, Equivalence
we call an Equality, as to belief and unbelief, so
as neither of the repugnant Speeches is preferr'd
as more credible than the other. Suspension is a
Settlement of the Intellet, whereby we neither
affirm nor deny any thing. Indifiurbance is a
Composure and Tranquility of Mind.

Query. W'hat Nation invented Painting ?
Anfoer. I am not of their Opinions, who not
being able to wave their bigotted Veneration for
that Nation, which gave birth to the Divine Au-
thor of our Religion in Inquiries of this Nature,
will needs perfwade the World that we owe the
Invention of this Noble Ait to the Off-spring of
Abraham, as well as the other Arts and Sciences;
and that from them the AEgyptians, from the
e.gyptians the Grecians successively improved
them, and arrogantly challenged them as their

I i 2 ovn

own ProduEions. I must confess I cannot fee
any such mighty Reason for their Opinion, but
that I may without Impiety, 'or the least Irreve-
rence for the Christian Faith, declare my felfof
a contrary Opinion: For by the account of all
History, Sacred and Prophane, that Nation has
a much different Chara&er than what is agree-
able to a Mother of rare Arts and Sciences, being
always more devoted to their Gain, than to
imploy their time on fruitless Observation. And
I am sure the tEogyptians had too mean a Value
for them, to admit them as Teachers in any
thing: For at their first coming into A4gypt, all
the Interest of 7ofeph was not sufficient to gain
his Brethren any greater Favour than a Frontier'
Province, remote enough from the Court, to live
in, where their grcateft study was, to look after
their Flocks: And from the eg/yptians Aaron
iearn'd to make the Golden Calf; and Bezalect
an:d Aboliab were beholding to an extraordinary
Inspiration, not to the use of any Arts among
Them. But of all the Arts, none certainly can
be less in Reason deduced from the Children of
Jrael, than this of Painting, since so little Ad-
vantage could accrue to those that first busied
themselves about it: And if we may add, as a
supernumerary Reason, the Inclinations of their
Posterity, we cannot fuppof_ them so ingeniously
.iven, as to mind any Art that contributed not
i.nmediately to their Interest. I must therefore
conclude, that some more eafie and contented
Nation was the first Designers of this Gentleman-
.l-,e Profession: To pronounce magisterially in this
Cafe, and decide it to any, would be more than
the most Judicious of the Ancients durst do, who
were by many hundreds of Years nearer its Birth
than we; yet I am apt to believe the .Egyptians
were the first Painters or Statuaries, as well as

Philo-

Philosophers; tho' I cannot allow their vain-
glorious Brag, that PiEtre flourifh'd fix thousand
Years with them before it parled into Greece.
Tho' the Original of this Art is obscure, yet this
I may fay, that whatever People may in Justice
pretend to the Invention, Greece alone brought
it to Perfe&ion, and therefore may the better be
allow'd to arrogate it wholly to her self, tho' it
be controverted what part of Greece gave rife to
it; some attributing it to Sicyones, an Island in
the /cEgcan Sea; others to Corinth, where, by
'drawing Lines round the Extremities of the
Shadow of a Man, was rudely made the firit ftep
to Piture: The next advance was into one
Colour, called by the Greeks Monocheoma, that is,
of one Colour. But in a little time it became
more fiately, and arrived to that Beauty in which
it was in the days of Apelles; nor loft it much of
its Lustre in its Transmigration from Greece to
Rome, till the Diffolutcnefs of some Emperors,
and the Weakness of others, suffered the Empire
to be over-run, first with Ignorance, then with
Barbarity; for the Inundations of the Huns,Van.:-
lals, Goths and Lumbards, deftroy'd all that was
fine in this Art, till by Titian, Raphael Vrbin, An-
gelo, and the reft, it was revived almost to as
great an Excellence as in the Age of Apelles,
whom, with the reft of his Contemporaries, I
cannot help preferring before any of our Modern
Artists in Painting as well as Statues, if we may
believe the Account which some of the Ancients
give us of those admirable Pieces they themselves
had seen.

Query. Is there any fiuch thing as the Philjoophers
Stone ?

.infw. If we believe the Chymifts, they will tell
us many fine Stories about it: That as the Seed
of any Vegetable tranfmiutes that Humidity of

i i 3 the

the Earth proper to it self, into its own Form
and Nature; and thus from a little Seed become
a great Tree: So if the Seed of Gold or Silver
be cast into any baser Metal, it will convert it
into its own Nature. But then for this one
seeming Reason, they provide abundance of Ob-
fcurities and Enigmatick Subterfuges; for you to
lose your self in, if you attempt to pursue the
Imaginary Treasure, as the Flying Dragon, the
Spirit of 7'ellr, the Marriages and Conjundions of
So!, Fenz', Jupirer, &c. with Amalgama's Herme-
tical Feelinos, and an infinite number of such
strange kind of Whims, as if they writ with a
design not to be understood. Thus Faber has de-
liver'd one hundred and twelve Arcanums to do
Wonders, if you believe the Title of each Secret,
tho' I never heard of that Man, tho' a profefs'd
Chymift, that durst pretend to understand one
of them: So fearful they are of having their
Minds difcover'd by any but the 'True Sons of the
Art, that they make cvery thing a Mystery even
to themselves. They'll tell you indeed of one
Artefizs that liv'd a Thousand Years, and of a
French Scriv'ncr that built I know not how many
Hospitals and Churches, one by the Aurum Po-
t.bile, and the other by the Pomidtr of Projction.
Happy MSen, that Orst or so many Thousands
w'hon the Witchery of the Golden Hopes has be-
tray'd to this vain Attempt, and only arie to this
iole than Mliracle: Nay, the Scriv'ner cannot be
_ppo'ied to have had either time or Money
eneough, to have pass'd through all the tedious
Expzcriments required to its Perfeecion. The
Preat Duke of F!orence has, among his choice
Colenccion of Rarities, a Nail that is half Gold
and haif iron, which, as they would have you be-
tiee, was changed f:orm that baser Metal, by
h o:i;y soucfi of the Philosopher's Stone, which

it

it seems had not force enough to transmute the
whole. But this is a Trifle fit for the Athenian
Mercury to Duel upon, and give yon a tedious
Account of Lullim, Bacon, Reply, and the reft of
that Mad Tribe of Canting Scribblers.

And now for Variety, and to comply, as near as
1 can, with your delicate Gust in Poetry, I will
propose a few

Oueries in Metre.
Quefl. Self-nam' Athenians, let it, pra., beJitew

(For sure 'tis obvio;o to your mighty Wits)
Why Farts burn Blue when through a Candle blown,

And yet that's Yellow wihich the fame Arfeflits ?
For a Rhiming Affwer to this difficult Que-
stion, I must, doubtless, be referred (for that's
your Methad) to something that you have already
Printed.Well then,let's fee; What fays the Oracle ?

Vol. 5. N. x.
Hail Bard Divine' unknowvn ie mluf adore,

Thy Eagle pitch out-Soars our hangard fligbt :
Our glimmerrin Lamp within omill fjme no more,

Quench'd by too unfipportable a Light, &c.
Your Servant,Gentlemen, I thank ye; and con-
fess this is most incomparable Fustian, and super-
fine Stuff but nothing to the purpose of my Que-
stion, no more than it was to that with which it
was first Printed. Once more--

Quest. Tell meye Men of doughty QOill,
And fljew in Heraldry your Skill,
Which Order's beftJ and valu'd moss,
Knights of the StockT, or of the Post ?
Mistake me not, for I'm ir.cere,
I mean no Sham-Athenians here,

liii a.'!0

Altho' their Mansion of chief Fame
Stands by a Market of that Name:
Yet must I needs confess, their lWriting
Deserves no other fort of Knightng ;
Nor to a Sir can make Pretence,
Vnlefs where joyn'd with Reverence.

Quest. Tell me,infine, bhat Scorn is due to those,
W7:o bid Ms all our Doubts to them propose,
Yet anfq:er none, where difficult and hard ;
But call themr Riddles, and not worth Regard ?
When Oedipus, if wve may credit Fame,
Clearino a Riddle, got a Hero's Name.
Exczue tb'unequal InftJance that I bring;
For what Camparifon is in the thing ?
Athenian Rubbilh, and a Theban King.
Query. I,;encc have we our Opium ? Whether is
it Hot or Cold ? If Hot, why Narcotick., if Cold why
Sudorific&? Let it be what it will, how comes it to have
that Deference for thofc Animal Spirits- that are re-
q ui'd for the Alotion of the Heart, and for Refpira-
tion; as very often to spare them, .whilst it seizes the
others thzt communicate with the Organs of the Exter-
nal Senses ?

Anfw. Here is a Chain of intricate Questions
indeed, defign'd, I believe, to puzzle or-daunt
the new ;Undertakers; but I aflure the Querist
he wil! find himself mistaken, especially as to the
lift part: For who, tho' never fo'mean-fpirited,
could despond in Iuch a matter as this, when he
hias a fair Promise from such a Famous and Lear-
ned Society as the Athenian Mercury, that they
will take the pains to view his Endeavours, and
correct his Failings. This Encouragement, with
Ihe defi;c o" Self-lnftrr.Cfion, will make us conti-
nue and give our' Thoughts of such Questions as
fhfg A.cute Gentlenien hlve been unwilling to

anfw er

answer; tho' they must of necessity examine 'em
now, since they have openly pass'd their Word
to the Booksellers, and especially to their inti-
mate Friends the Coffee-houses, that they would
declare themselves upon the Questions of the Lon-
don Mercury. I must confess, this Consequence
of their Promise will prove troblefome to them;
yet am fatisfy'd they are Generous, and will stand
to their Word. So to the Question.

i. We have our Opium, some from Greece, some
from the Kingdom of Cabaia in the Eft-Indies,
and some from the Territories of Grand Cairo in
Egypt; for it is a Tear that diftils from Poppies
that grow in them Countries, when at certain
times of the Year, Incisions are made in the
Heads of those Plants; what is had this way is
the purefl and belt, and therefore kept by the
People for their own use, who fend us that which
they press out of the said Heads, and call Meco-
niunm.

2. Notwithstanding that Opium disables the
Spirits for a time, from the Performance of their
Duty, and ftupifies, as Narcoticks do, that are
granted to be cold ; yet I hold it hot, by reason
of its bitter Taste, piercing Smell, and fudorifick
Effets; but chiefly, because it is almost al-
together Sulphureous, which none can doubt of,
that knows how inflamable it is, and how easily
diffolv'd in the Spirit of Wine. Now how such
a Substance can be Narcotick, is not as hard to
solve, as it may seem strange at first fight; for.
it is clear, that any thing can be Narcotick,:
which can for some time obftrucd the Commerce
of the interral and external Senses: And it is as
plain, that any thing can effect this, which can
either fix the Animal Spirits, flop the small Pas-.
fages of the Brain where they are formid pr bini
der their Influx into the Nerves, a Subftanice

that

that is Sulphureous, and consequently of ramons
and pliable parts, can do either or all three.
And consequently Opium can be together Narco.
tick and Hot.

Finally, The reason why Opium does flop the
Influx of the Spirits into the Organs of the ex-
ternal Senses, whilfl Respiration and the Moti-
on of the Heart, go their Ordinary Train, is, I
believe, because the Insertion of the Carotids in-
to the Brain is nigher the Origin of the Nerves,
that convey Animal Spirits into the firfi, than
them that supply the latter; whence it may very
well happen, that the little quantity of Opium
that is ordinarily prefcrib'd, is altogether taken
up in obftruEing the first small paflages it meets
with, and that none, or at leat a very inconfi-
derable part of it reaches the Cerebellum, where
the par Odavam has its Origin. Add to this,
that it is very probable, that there Nerves are
wider, and the small Chanels of the Brain that
lead towards them more open, by reason of the
uninterrupted Motion of the Animal Spirits in
!them parts, than others are where this Motion
is often difcontinu'd, so that they cannot be so
easily obftrucdd as the latter.

There is a Plant that grows on Mount Liba-
nus in Syria, which the Arabian calls the Golden
Herb; it begins to appear in the MvIonth of May,
after the Snow is thawn ; in the twilight it ap-
pears all in a Flame, and continues like a Torch
until Morning, without diminution of its Sub-
fiance. Moreover, the People of that Country
think, that the Transmutation of Metals might
be compafs'd, but they dare not dig it up, be-
cause such as have attempted it dy'd on the fud-
den, and in the Undertaking. Pray your
Thoughts upoa there surprising Phenomenons.

AnfP.

Anfw. Supposing the Relation true, all the
parts of it may be folv'd with one very simple
Conjecture: Only supposing that this Plant grows
in a Bituminous and Sulphurous Soil, which is
always exhaling Steams in great quantity, which
being condented by the Cold of the Night, kin-
dle into a Flame ; which is no greater wonder,
than to fee the fat Exhalations of Church-yards
burn like Flame in the Air. Now when the Sun
is risen, he rarifies them Vapours, and so thin,
that they mix with and lore themselves in the am-
bient Air. As to the Transmutation of Metals,
it is a groundless Thought of the Vulgar ; but as
to the sudden Death of those that attempt the
digging up of this Plant, it may be true for ought
we know, for its like enough that a great quanti-
ty of them Steams, which probably being gross
are Narcotick, may either flill the Motion of
the Blood, or fix the Animal Spirits, and so of
necessity bring sudden Death.

Query. 'hlethler the Toung Students Library, pro-
posed by the Athenians, be not the cast Common-Place-
Boot offome Antiquated Pedagogue ?

Anff. 'Tis very probable, for the Authors fe-
leded seem to be such, as were most likely to
fall within the Acquaintance of a Pedant, whose
whole Life had been deftin'd to the teaching of
Boys to decline Amo, and to tell their Fingers;
and the InftruAihg of Ignorant Peasants in the
Knowledge of their Christian Names, and the
Church-Catechifm : This Medly of Authors seems
to be well forted; rVrgil s e'Eneids and the Works
of St. Auffin, Lucian's Dialogues and Dr. Ham-
mond's Pra&ical Catechism, the Works of Ariflo-
tie and Culpeper's Midwife, Horace and Bunyan's
Pilgrim's Progress, Ovids' Metamorphosis and Dr.
Sherlockof Death, the Call to the Unconverted
and Martial's Epigrams. In ihort, the Man who

made

The London and
made this Colleation was a very necefrary Man
in his Generation; for hear one may learn to cap
Verses and turn a Pancake, save Souls, and cure
Corns and kib'd Heels; steal a Flourish to adorn
a Country Sermon, and set forth a Breaking-up
Declamation: So that the Improvements the firit
Design may receive from so Learned and Judici-
ous Society as that of the Athenisans, will render
this Miscellany as useful as a Pacing-Saddle,or the
late famous Engine'to part Cream-Cheefe ; very
rcc-cfary to be read by YorkJhire Vi-rs and their
Pious Dairy-Mlids, School-Boys, Fidlers, Fen-
cers, Midwives and Athenians.

Query. Whether it is not the real Interest of the
Athenian Society, rather to endeavour the keeping up
of tre London Mercury, than its discontinuance ?

Ai/If. The Roman Historians tell us, That it
was once very hotly debated in the Senate, what
they fhonul do with their Rival Republick Car-
rheage; some were for utterly demolishing it, but
others were as earnest to have it still preferv'd,
out of a prudent Consideration, that if that Ci-
ty were once deftroy'd, the Romans would prove
relfv and effeminate. And now let the Athenians,
if they please ( ince they have a Predicator a-
mongft them ) make the Application.

Query. What is the reason why a Chequer is plac'd
at MAlehkgfe Doors ?

Aiv'. This Qaeftion was some Months ago
ento to the Athni;ian;, by the fame Token that
they were pleas'd to fay, That without doubt a
reason might be found for this Custom somewhere
or other in History; but that for their part, ha-
ving other more material Questions upon their
bands, they would not give themselves any far-
ther trouble ah:r:,t it. Now there is no great
?M1.erI in the uatter, nor is a MVlan oblig'd to
turn o:.er his eId.n or Spclman to find it out:

For

For all that need be said upon this occasion, is,
That Alehouses in the days of yore were places
of Gaming, where our fober Ancefrors used to
pass away an Afternoon or so at Chefs; and
therefore, for diftintion-fake, they plac'd a Che-
quer over the Door, just as now where a Billiard-
Table, or a Green and two Bowls are painted
on the Sign, any Person may be confident he is
not far from a Billiard-houfe or a Bowling-green.

Query. Of what Antiquity is Dancing upon the
Rope; and what may be fuppos'd to give the firfi rife
to that Sport ?
. Anjw. Though the latter end of Atguft be the
fittest time to anfiver this Question, yet, since
the Querilf has been so importunate of late, we
can tell the Antiquity of it is unquestionably very
great: For (not to mention any more ) Terence
who liv'd a considerable time before the Birth of
our Saviour, mentions it in his Prologue to the
Hecyra; where taking occasion to complain of
the thinness of his Audience, and the ill Success
of his Play, he ascribes it to the People's being
so mightily taken up at that time with a Rope-
Dancer; Ita popula fludio fiupitw, in Funambula
animum occuparat.

'Tis somewhat difficult to aflign the time pre-
cifely when this fort of Recreation first appear'd
in the World ; but it is no ill-grounded Opinion,
That it commenced a little, after the.Invention
of the Theatrical Sports, which derive their Ori-
ginal from the Merry Meetings of the old Pa-
gani in Vintage-time, where they sift offered
Sacrifice, and then fell to good Eating and Drink-
ing ; and at last, when they were in their Cups,
those that were the Top Wits of their refpe&ive
Villages pelted one another with Doggrel, and'
Country Raillery, which prov'd the first occasion
of Comedy; and others who valu'd themselves

upon

upon Feats of Activity, would divert the Com-
pany by Dancing and Leaping upon Leathern
Bottles, that were well greased and anointed;
and so this Exercise, perhaps, gave the first hint
zo our active Sport, which now makes up so much
of the Entertainment at Barthol'mew-Fair. And
as the Romans borrow'd -their Comedy from the
Grecians; so it is not improbable, that to them
likewise they owe their Rope-Dancing.

Gentlemen,
I TN T our last London Mercury, you very clearly
I fated the Controverffe about that farmous Ptfage
in Josephus, lib. 8. cap. 4. concerning our Saviour,
viz. Whether it it were really genutne or not, or whe-
interpolated by the piGos Frauds of the Primitive Chri-
fJians. It appears very odd to me, that Josephus,
zvwh was so exat an Historian of the Affairs of Judea,
jfould be so highly fi!ent, and fay nothing of our Sa-
viour. For, tho' the place where this Testimony of his,
concerning Chri- ape no
a a ltoether ro proper for
it, yet if this be not really the Tefrimony of Josephus,
he no where else takes notice of him. But, Gentlemen,
girantir. this Passage to be fpuriozw and forg'd, yet
would it not be better and more for the promotion and
propagation of Cirrifranity, to have the Common Peo-
ple believe it to be true ? I my self have heard it urz'd
by a Reverend Divine, as a Collateral Proof of the AMi-
racles our Saviour wrought ; nay, he j.ti not flick to
quote even Seneca too, the' that Philojopher no where
t.kas notice of him, except his Epifile to St. Paul, and
St. Paul's to him, be of any weight. However, after
all, I believe the design of that Reverend Gentleman
was good, and purely to possess his Auditors with a
greater regard and refpec7 for the Truth of our Religion.
'l's very necefairy that your next Mercury flould an-
s!er this, and so put an end to the Dijpute. I am

Yourhumble Servant.

Ajirf.

Anfjw. Since there has already in our last been
so much said of this matter, a few Lines will di-
fpatch an Answer to this Ingenious Gentleman's
Queries. His firit Objetion carries but little
weight with it, which is this:. Because Yofephus
does no where else make mention of our Sa-
viour than in this Place, that therefore he
mufl do it there. Now Jofephbu does no
where in his Work take notice of the In-
fanticidium by Herod, which an exat Historian
one would think ought to have done: But the
molt accurate Historians that have come to our
Hands, have doubtless omitted several things
done in their own times, and left them for others
to relate. Eusebius lib. I. cap. 8. EccleJiafl. Hist.
indeed quotes Josephus Antiq. lib. 17. as difinge-
nuoully as he does several others, where he
makes him relate the Punishment with which God
affli&ed Herod for the Murther of the young
Children,- leaving but the Names of yuda the Son
of Saripbhus, and Matthias the Son of Margalothus,
who were slain by the Command of Herod, long
after the Murther of the young Children, which
Josephus mentions not at all. But if this PafTage
were genuine, how could it possibly have efcap'd
the notice of Ju7tin Martyr in his Dialogues with
Trypho? or how should Tertullian and Clemens Alex-
andrinus so strangely forget to urge its Authori-
ty against the Jews they disputed with, and com-
bated ? and lastly, Is it not a Miracle that none
should ever take notice of it till Eusebius's time,
who, 'tis very probable, was the first Starter of
it ? St. Hierom translating that part of the Tefti-
mony, U- i o xeLros, does not fay, Hic erit Chri-
flus, but Credebatur efe Chriflus. , St. Hierom was
very well acquainted with the Frauds of those
times, and believ'd it very improper for a yew to
fay those Words. Cardinal Baronius fays, That

in

in an Hebrew Manuscript he found those Words
'cratch'd out; and 'tis very likely (if it be true
what Baronius fays) that he that did it had de-
teced the Forgery.

To the latter part of this Gentleman's Letter,
we have no more to fay, but that we think Chri-
itianity has no need of the supports of Artifice,
Forgery, or Contrivance. At this Rate, the Sy-
bils Verfeszand Agbaras's Epirle are to be eiteem'd
authoritative and useful; whereas they rather
serve to expose our Holy Religion to the Insults
of Spninofa's Gang. At this rate, the Learned Men
of this late Age have- trifled away their time;
Monsieur Baluze and our Learned Protestant Di-
vine Blondel, might have spar'd the trouble to
the World and themselves. The Fables of the
Donur Confiantini, King Lucius, and the Thebnan
Legion, hall be cry'd up; and for our Protestant
Interest, that of Pope Joan. Our Bleled Saviour
call'd himself Truth, let it be therefore our Bus.
ness to find it out and adore it. LalFantim fays
well in his Inflitutions, Summum fapientis gradtm
attiuifti q uando salsa intellexeris.

Quest. Whether the Herb rwhich roe commonly call
Fern, bears or produces any Seed, and how or rwhich
way it is to be saved ?

Anfw. There is a considerable number of Plants
reckon'd among the Imperfete, or such as have
neither Seed nor Flower, which by later Disco-
veries are found to be by far the moR Fruitful
of any in producing of Seed: So the Fern,Polypody,
Maidenhair, Spleenwort, and the reft of the Capillary
Plants, were called Afperma, and never known
to bear any Seed, until the Invention of Micro-
scopes, by which it was difcover'd, That these
little heaps of Dufl that appear'd on the back-
fide of the Leaves of these Plants, were so many
heaps of Seed ; but so small, that one single Grain

was

was not visible to the naked Eye. Hence such
Plants are called Ep;ihyllofpermt because they bear
their Seed on the Leaf.And the best way certainly
to gather or preserve the Seed of them,is to pluck
one of the Leaves with the ripe Seed upon it.
So the FuctM or Alga marina, in English Sea-oreck,
was reckon'd among the more imperfet barren
Plants, until that Learned Naturalist Dr. Tancred
Robinson firlf difcover'd, That these Bladders, so .
conspicuous in the Leaves of the Wreck, were the
Seedvefrels of that Plant, and that they contain
perfe&c Seed within them. Neither do I in the
least doubt, that all kinds of Mofs,Coral,Sponge,&c.
and even Mufbrooms themfelves,have Seed, or that
it fial lie long undifcover'd in them, tho' as yet
we have no certainty of it.
Qu. Quid Baccho Nymphas adhibes temeraria Caupo,

Cum quo fit natm debeat igne mori?
Refp. Difpare Dii fexu vincuntur,Amice,domamus

Sic Bacchum Nymphis,fic Venerem maribus.
Query. By rohat means was it,that the Sepulchral
Lamps of the Ancients, did some of them burn iooo,
others 1500 Tears ?

'Anfw. The Querijf tells us, That he believes
himself able to make such; 'but I hope he'll par-
don us that we do not believe him; for we are
so far from that, that we believe there never was
any Lamp made to endure so long. It's true,
Monsieur DesCartes has taken much pains to adapt
his Philosophy to this Phcenomenon; but we may,
without injury to that Great Man's Memory,fay,
That several more Instances may be given for his
being concern'd for the Explication of Appea-
rances which never were.

We;
Kkk.

We have received a Letter from the Gentle;
man, whose Quere about the Explanation of the
I75th Verse in Juvenal, Sat. XI.

O.ui Lacedxmonium pytifmate lubricat orbem.
we anfwer'd before. This Gentleman is, it seems,
not pleased with the Conjeture we make how it
is to be undertood, but tells us, That If. Vofius
(who, he fays, understood Bawdry very well) in-
terprets that pallage to a very obscene sense, Cec.
We were not ignorant how Vofius would have
that place to be understood; but we think we
have but little reason (notwithstanding what
Vofi]us has said of the matter) to depart from

believing the other Interpretation
Not. i;Cjatul. we before gave of it to be the true.
- 59- Pityfma is no more than the Wine

either squirted from between the
Teeth (as we generally try that way whether the
Wine be good or not) or else some little left in
the Glass, and flung upon the Ground. In this
sense Chremes in Terence's Heautontimoreumenos
speaks: Pitiffando modo mihi quid vini abfumpfit ?
Sic,hoc,dice1ns,Afperum pater,hoc eft: aliud levius
fedes vide, Relevi dolia omnia, &c. We think this
a very fair instance of its signification. Vof.u (of
whom the Qerift knows the Epigram,

Qjiod si non placeat filax Catullus
Effirti cape nequiora Vofli.)
is mighty willing that this paflage thould be
thought Bawdy; and indeed thatSatyr of Yuvenal
gives great countenance to his Conjeaure, which
treats of a Vice not fit to be named. As to the
pafage in Apuleis, we like not the reading either
of Lipfius, or our Price. It may be read either
daterrima fortune in the Gen. C;fe sing. and under-

itand

Rfand mancipia, or some fuch-word; or diJcrimina
fortune ; or, if that don't please him, rctrimenta
fortune. Apuleius is not ftrir to Latinity (for so
much he confefies himself) and no body ought to
be accountable for his negligence.

We have not yet had leisure to consult our
Books about the Receipt to make Lacedemonian
Porrage for the Ouerift, who fays he is old, and
would willingly leave off eating Flelh, if he could
find the way to make that Broth. We advise
him rather to find out the Duke of Bucktngham's
famous Receipt for making 'of Porrage, with
which the Taylor's Wife would have the whole
Bill paid.

Qu. When rwas the Surplice firfi ifi&tituted, and by
rhom ?
Anfn. I doubt not but many Iabits, Rites, and
Customs, both of the Jewish and Heathen Tem-
ples, were admitted into the Chrifrian Church in
its very Infancy; and among those I reckon the
Surplice. The Jewish Priefcs had peculiar Vest-
ments, which they pat on when they officiated,
and so had the Heathen ; their Sacred Garments
were of Linen, 'and for colour White ; and in the
like Habit did the ancient Ministers of God in-
compass the Altar, as one of the Fathers ex-
presses it, in imitation of the Angels (by whose
name Bithops and Priests are sometimes called)
standing about the Throne of God, of which the
Altar was looked on as a Representative. Now
of Angels we read, That whenever they made
their Appearances on Earth, theirGarments were
White and Shining.

Gentlemen,

E are two FHusbandlefs young Creatures; -
Gentleman is now rn Love wit one of us ; but
difpepnjth hi- Fayvours so equally, wc could never yet

kz ik li2 '

've a reasonable Conjetlure which it was, tho' each
of us has. Vanity enough to decide in her own favour.
One night this Gentleman pass'd a Complement on us
to this purpose: If he were a Monarch he could
marry the One - and could be satisfied to beg his
Bread with the Other. Quere, Which of these was
the greatest Complement ? Kind Gentlemen, pray re-
filve this in yowr next Mercury, and you will mightily
oblige, at leaJ, one of

Your humble Servants.
A4,nf. Why truly, Ladies, we are absolutely of
Opinion, that the last was the greater Comple-
ment; for if the Gentleman designed any Favour
at all in his. Expreflion, it muif certainly fall on
her fide, by how much the more probable it is,
that he will sooner be a Beggar than a Monarch.
Though, for the first Husbandlefs young Crea-
tures Comfort, we allure her that we have a
young Gentleman for her in our Society, upon
condition she bring Food with her as well-as,
Appetite; for he will by no means be satisfied to
beg his Bread with her. So we take our leaves
for this time of theLadies,advifing them, friendly,
to be as speedy as they can in getting Husbands;
for if the War lasts long (as 'tis very likely it
will) they must expec the Commodity to be
scarcer, and advance at least zo I. per Cent.

Qu. What was the Jus Nigrum made of, that
Plutarch tells wa was eaten by the Lacedemonians ?

Anfwr. 'Tis a hard matter positively to fay of
what it was made, there is indeed so little room
even for conjeture. The Lacedemonians were of
all People the most temperate in their Diet, as
Ylutr-cb in vSta Ly)curgi wirnefles; and this 0To'0,
or sparing Diet of theirs, was for these Reasons,
(of which Xnophon, and Plutarch in his Laconick

InJitutes)

Institutes) that they might be the better able to
endure Hunger when opprefs'd by War; and be-
fides, they imagin'd it both healthful, and to cause
a greater agility of Body. But this 1Chh, WcS
was a fort of Broth that was defign'd chiefly for
their Old Men, the Young being allow'd Flelh;
and that this Porrage was in the greatest esteem
among them beyond any otherDainties, Plutarche
testifies in Laconicis and in Lyctrgo. Tri '5' S. 7
£ud0OaUijA i sttpt
-rt .Ad-JTW shds (,<Vda?> sc'S-- YSFCtTtI'.-S^

i U
' r¢p.CuTcpg, s&c. That the Comporition
of it was pieces of Flelh and Blood boil'd with
Salt and Vinegar, we conjeaure from Plutarch de
tuenda valetudine, where he fays, That the Lace-
demonians used to give their Cooks Salt and.Vine-
gar, and bid them procure the. reft from the
ViAims. If this will not fatisfie the Learned
Centleman that sent the Quere, if he will have a
little patience, he may doubtless expet a better
Account from the molt Learned Society of At/h-
nians.

Query. Whether the Reformed Churches beyoad Sea
do not alt make ife of a Form of Prayer, or i;vics of
them does not ? And nwhether they do not approve of
the 'Liturgy of the Church of England, or wihich of
them declares again/ it ? .

Anfin. Dr. Durel hath fully evinc'd to theWorld,
that the Reformed Churches do use Forms of Frayetr;
the Lutherans throughout all Europe, and Calvin's
Liturgy, is most commonly bound up with the
French Bibles; and John Knox himself penn'd a
Liturgy for the Scotch Presbyterians: The way of
extempore Praying was borrow'd by the DijJfnters
from the Emissaries of the Romish Church, who
by the Pretences of purer Devotion, fought to
bring the Common-Prayer into dis-repute. In
the fame-Book it is proved, That the Reformed
Churches do approve of our Liturgy; and it.is

, K kk 3 plain

plain they do, because in the Harmony of Con.
feffionssfo often printed at Geneva, &c. the XXXIX
Articles of our Church (in which it is well known,
that both our Discipline and Service are aflerted,
as consonant to God's Word) always find a
chief place. And whatever some private hot-
headed Men may have said to the contrary, in
their Letters to their private Friends, I know of
no Church that hath exprefs'd her open dislike
either of Liturgies in general, or in particular of
our excellent Service.

Query. 7e2 Athenians excIsed themselves from
givinu a Latin Anfvei r to the Question which began
with Fare Ae, Vol.6. Numb. 13. because (fore
focth) they w7ould not make an Olio of all Languages.
Qu. Why then did they trump a Greek Epigram upon
Quid Baccho Nymphas, since Greek will certainly
help to make it an Olio asr well as Latin ?

Avi7'. We believe the Pretence of the Olio no
mrore than they themselves do; for we find them
liberal enough of their Greekland Latin, nay and
Hebrewi too, when they can have it on free-coft.
So that we mufft e'en impute it to the narrowness
of their Poetical Genius, which can perform no
Feats out of Englill (and in that but very sorry
ones, the Lord knows) till such time as they thall
vouchsafe to convince i s of the contrary.

,Query. Whether aniy o -the Lacedemonian Society
has a privte enficnO fror the late King and Lewis
the XIVti, ai is fzggeflcd in the Poftfcrirt.Letter to
the Athenian Mercury, Numb. i8. Vol. 6?

Afi-W. Not a Fdrthing more than the Athenia3ns
had from the Presbytery at Edinburgh or Geneva
las Year, for discharging the Dissenters of the
G;hilt c, Schism in one of their Alcrcuries. In-
deCC!': t rnut the Athelenils out of their road, who
pretc;' t[o anfiver all Questions after us (tho'
.ith ihant success may easily be seen by their

Anfwe!s

Answers to the Questions out of Virgil, suvenal,
&c.) we flarted up a set of ridiculous Queries,
and anfwer'd them as ridiculously. We are sorry
to hear that some well-meaning Men have been
offended at two or three pafages in them; tho',
if a favourable Interpretation were allow'd them,
we are confident they would not appear criminal:
It would be too tedious to descend into a parti-
cular Jultification of them in this place,and there-
fore we mutt e'en leave them to the Reader's
candour. However, before we part, we present
our Service to the Athenian Gentleman who an-
fwer'd the Question out of Lilly, and make bold
to tell him, That since he was so kind as to be-
flow the Titubo, and Poto, and all that, upon one
of our Society (who out of a just Consideration of
his own unworthiness, thinks he no more deserves
them than any- of the Athenians) he is defir'd to
take Nubo, with the three scurvy Impersonals
tigert Pudet and Tider, home with him, to relieve
and comfort him under the Fatigues of Matri-
mony.

Qu. I desire your Opinion of V. 309; Satyrm i4.
Juvenal.

---Dolia nudi Non ardentCynici.
Prateus in loc. faith, Dolia (quippe sicilia, feu
teftacea) non funt incendio obnoxia: But I cannot
be reconciled to his Opinion, because dolium singly
signifies differently from the fame word, when joyned
with fi&ile, or the Ithe word.

Anfw. The Invention of that Criticifii is not
owing to Pratew ; Lubin in his Notes on that
Verse, had told us the fame thing out of Pliny be-
fore. Nlor doth Pratem's Rtafon please me, for if
by'non, ardent we mult understand, non Junt incendio
obnoxia, Diogenes's-Tub was certainly as liable to

Kkk k4

be burnt as Marble or Ebony, which the Poet'
mentions. Nor is the Querifr's Argument against
dolium without figile cogent, while the Satyrift
mentions Diogenes, whose House it was, and every
body at Rome knew what manner of Tub that
Cynic lived in. The Satyrift means no more but
this: That Licinis kept his Servants always upon
the Watch, to observe that no Fire broke out
and defaced his rich Houfhold-ftuff, his Statues
of Gold and Silver, of Brass and Ivory, and the
nobler Marbles, the loss of which would not
easily be repaired (for he is proving the Truth of
that sage Observation, V. 305. -- Mifera eft
magni cuflodia census.) But the Cynic's Tub (and
therefore I would read it--At lata teftudine,&c.
to make good the Antithelis) was proof against
Fire, it had pail the Flames once already, and,
if it happen to be broke, another is easily pur-
chased, or the fame easily mended.-- Eadem
plumnoo cormmiffi manebit; which is a plain Inti-
mation, fays Lipfus, that it was an earthen Tub,:
for they bound the pieces of such together with
Lead. Dioaenes Lacrtius fays, That the Tub be-'
long'd to the City of Athens, and that the Cynick
himself in his Epistles confefs'd, That having
spoken to his Friend to provide him a House, he in
the mean time made the Tub in the Metroon serve
him instead of an Habitation. This Tub Dio'ge.
nes, in his Epistle to Apollexis, who had promis'd
to-fit him an House, calls KX^i0rv and fays, that
he did light on it by chance; bidding Apollexis
rejoyce with him, that he had found out a way
of-living according to Nature. The Critick Me,.
nage would have this Tub to be of Timber, be-
cause Lielan fays, That he roll'd it up and downi;
but ,it hal he acknowledges, That an earthen
Tub ( which certainly was thick as well as big)
might be tumbl'd up and down in a soft and
smooth place. Qu.

Qu. Whether the Athenians be not as able to mprite a
Natural History, as Ogilby was to translate Virgil,
Sh-wel Juvenal, or D-sey Horace ?

Anf. No sure; for tho' they have the advan-
tage of finding some part already well done by
the Ingenious and Learned Dr. Plot, e&c. an Ad-
vantage the others were not so happy in, yet
they have not the, Wit or Judgment to steal
well. They have jufl the Reverse of Mida's
Fate; for what was before Gold, turns to Dross
as soon as defil'd by their Touch. They would
have taken it for a malicious Observation, if any
other had taken notice that Sparta was become a:
Sport for Athenian Owls; but coming from them-
selves, it cannot be conltru'd a malicious Refle-
&ion upon them, who (poor- Fools) spoke
Truth (the almost only time they have hitherto.
done it) at unawares, without thinking, which'
they are not much addicted to. Thus they daily
manifest,. That tho' they have a SAL T among:
them, it is not of the Salis Attici. And now we
are not behind-hand with them so much as in a
Quibble.

Query. Why the Text in St. John's firfi Ep. rela-
ting to the Trinity, is wanting in mojt of the old Ma-
nufcripts in all Languages ?

Anf Perhaps it was never there; and I am in-
clinable to believe so, because among all the Or-
thodox Fathers of the Church, in the Ages when'
Ariwnifra was most prevalent, I cannot remember,
that any one uses this Text as a Proof against
these Enemies of the Divinity of our holy Savi-
our, which undoubtedly they would, had it been
in their Books; but if it were there, and ever e-
ras'd, it was probably done by thole very Here-
ticks, when only a few Orthodox remain'd, and
the whole World, as St. Hierome complains, won-
der'd to fee it self turn'd Arian.

Query.

Query. The Athenians, in their Proposals for a
Natural Hifiory, peark of a Rahi-bor appearing in an
entire Circle. Qu. Which is the greater Rarity, Sense
in an Athenian Mercury, or such a Rain-bow ?

Anfi The latter sure, for we don't think it im-
potfible, but the Athenians may sometimes ( as a
great Author fays) deviate into Sense. These
Proposals the Athenians have copy'd verbatim from
Dr. Plot's Enquiries, bating some ingenious Ad-
ditions of their own, such as that of the Circular
Rain-bow, which came out as a Fore-runner to
the reft of the Nonsense they were refolv'd to
speak about the Rain-bow the next Mercury; ehen
amongst other things, they tell us, that it is im-
pofible the Rain-bow Ihould not be perfeely
round, unless the Wind could blow an imaginary
Angle of 45 deg. I' would advise them hence-
forth not to refute things they'don't underitand;
and since this appears to be such a mighty Riddle,
I'1 tell them how it can be folv'd in few Words,
without blowing of imaginary Angles; viz. The
smallest change of the Figure of those Guts of
Water will'make an alteration of the Angle, un-
der which the Colours must be seen, if they should
be alter'd from Spherical in the least degree, in-
lead of an Angle of 41 and 52, the Colours muit
be seen under an Angle much bigger, or much less
according to different Cafes.

Qu. How Old is the Cuflom of flaing Grace before
.e.eat ?

Anf. We have reason to believe, as Old as
Mankind; since it seems very natural, that we
iould invoke the Blessing of the' Author of our
Being, on that which has such an immediate In-
fluence towards the Preservation of it; its an al-
lowable Pleafintry, we-fhould tell our Reader,
its as old as _ido, who, poor Lady, wanting a
Chaplain ( which perhaps might be the reason of

her

her being so fond of efne s) after the House
was hush'd, and a Bumper fill'd, begins Grace
her self to this purpose:

7upiter (hofpitibus nam te dare jura loquunttr)
Hunc latum tyriifque diem trojaque profectis
Ejfe velis, noftrofq; hajt meminiffe minores.
Adfit latitia Bacchbs datur & bona Juno.
Qu. If there were no Light, would there be any
Darkness ; and so of other Contraries ?

Anf Tho' Darkness be nothing but the priva-
tion of Light; yet we hav, annex'd a positive
Idea to it; if there never had been any Light,
there must necefIarily have been a Privation ( or
to speak in the Language of the Schools) a Ne-
gation of Light, but such as'would not have cau-
fed in us that Idea, which now we call by the
Name of Darkness: The Gentlemen who fent.us
this QAery, sent us some others, which we have
not leisure to Answer at present.

Qu. Whether Nutmegs or Moral Honefly be mofj
reconcileable with the Climate of Scotland?

Anf. To tell you the plain truth on't, Sit, the.
more Southern part of the Island, hath not much
to, brag of its Fertility in either of there Fruits;
our Neighbours in Scotland have this much at
least to fay for themselves, that be their Princi-
ple Good or Bad, they flick by it.

Query. How did the Lacedemonians punifij Adul-
tery ?

Anfw. Why really, not at all that I can read
of: Nor do I fee what Reason they had to order
any Punishment for a Crime they could not be
guilty of; for Lycurgs (who was their Law-gi-
ver, and perhaps as Crafty a Legillator as Alti-
quity can furnilh us with ) gave Indulgence to
thofe-whofe Inclinations did not lead them to

ap-

approve ofa Marry'd Life, or as Xenophon expref-
fes, e. 53 7t eJ wr "X' I.V tv uvoy.Esv n Bu'AOt%&, &C. and
yet were desirous of Progeny, let him ( fays the
Sage Lycurgus) if he like the Woman, and that
the be fertile, agree with the Husband upon the
matter, as well as he can, .7oyc t J Xo
'i d c TrT'7di;
7-'iroiS2T that it may be lawful for her to make
Children (as the true Translation is) for him.
Plutarch witnefles as much, and Nicolaus de mori-
bLs Gentium apud'Stobeum tells us, that this Pri-
vilege was given to Strangers as well as their
own Citizens. Plutarch gives us the Reason of
the Legifjltor, because he lookd upon Children to
be the Commonwealth's in general, not refpe-
&ting the fondness of particular Parents, fo.that
he encourag'd his Citizens not to have a sole re-
gard to fatisfie a iuftful and warm Appetite
(which now a-days we only aim at) but to con-
fult the Publick Good and Advantage, Plutarch
in Lycurgo e0 in Apotheg. brings in one Gerardm
ridiculing a certain Fellow that ask'd the fame
Quetlion of him, as the Q.uerifi does of us, to
which we refer him, Modesty and our Inclinati-
ons obliging us to deal kindly by our Querijfs;
This is indeed contrary to Divine Precept, and
one would think Natural Reason too; but I sup-
pose the chief Reason that invited Lycurgus to al-
low a Communication of Wives, was to take es-
fe&ual means to exclude Jealoufie and Suspicions,
and reconcile greater Friendships among them.:
For doubtless, he that would not grudge the
Use of his Wife to a Friend, would hardly deny
him any thing eife; and what was a great Hap-
piness, likewise to remove all Quarrels, Duel-
i!ng, and the Devil and all (too frequent among

ws, which mright arise concerning a bare Woman)
This surely kept them in Concord and Agree-
nent, which whatever Nation enjoys, must ne-.

cess

ceffarily-flourifh, as without it, it must as necef-
farily be ruin'-and deftroy'd.

Query. A Gentleman, who was affronted by anio-
ther, order'd his Servant' to lay wait for him from
whom he received the Affront, and to Bastinado hin
soundly : It happen'd that I came by, and the Servant
thinkng me the Person, beat me most unmercifully.
Qu. If I have not an Agion againfj the Master ; or
Whether Ignorance will excuse the Fag ?

.Anfw. Ignorance of the Fad does not excuse
the Person that did the Wrong: In our Law we
never examine his purpose or intent, fajum vi;
demus; but our Law is, that Purposes in a Per-:
son that commands another to a&, cannot be
transferr'd from one Person to another. A com-
mands his Man to Rob B, and he Robs C. 4 is
not guilty of that Robbery; but if it be' to lay
Poyfon for B, and he lays it for C, whereof C
dies, A is guilty of his Poyfoning; for the
Poyfon ads upon any, and was a natural Agent-
In the other Cafe the Agent was a voluntary A-
gent, and follows his own Will, not the Will
and Pleasure bs A.

Query. Gent. I am refolv'd to go round the Earth
on Foot; I desire to sorw whether my Head or Feet
will travel most, and how much the one more than
the other ?

Anfw. Sir. Be pleas'd to fend us your Height
by the next, and the Road you resolve to'take,
that is, whether it be a greater or lelfer Circle,
and we shall give you as exaf an Anfiver, as the
Question is capable of; but that we may not balk
your Curiosity, supposing you to be as tall as an
ordinary Man, if you will be at the Expences of
levelling all the Mountains in your way, and
promise to trace the Equator like a Rope-dancer,
your Head will travel about seven Paces more
than your Feet tho' we must confess, to folvre

the

the Question exa&ly, requires the Quadratureof
the Circle; and this informs us of the great loss
we are at for want of it in solving such an im-
portant and useful Question as this is.

Query. Whether the Knowledge of Men or Things
be the better ?

Anfw. Of Men undoubtedly; for Men are one
of the Noblest Parts of those things which are
worth our Knowledge. But if this Gent. mean
Whether if a Man were to be confin'd, either to study
,1en or Books, which of the two is mofk eligible ? I
still anfver, the study of Men ; for its seen, that
those Men who only converse with Books, im-
bibe many Notions which are altogether impra-
cicable, and become, for want of Conversation,
proud and morose, conceited and ill-bred; where-
as Conversation with Men ( especially after some
acquaintance with Books) makes a Man easily,
and without the trouble and fowrenefs of Con-
finement, an Accomplifh'd Man, i.'e. a Sociable
Creature, a MVan of Pratice and Use, to which
all StudyTought to be direred.

Query. Having receiv'd great Satisifation in fame
hlilologicaL Ouefons .Ient Yak, I defre to know how
V theo Confoant was pronounmc' by the old Romans ?

Anf. Prifjian tells us that the Digramma f
and v bad formerly the fame Force; and this we
own it sometimes had, both when it was set be-
fore Words beginning with a Vowel, as in s; vis
;p contraledly out of ?zp ver, & vre vefpera ; as
also when it was plac'd in the middle. as in &Oov
oztun, a3s- ovi., ie& divas, &c. where it exacly
discharges the Office of the Digramma; never-
thelefs, there are several Reasons that incline us
to believe that the old Romans pronounc'd v, just
as we do our I', and no otherwise; for the Greci-
ans always exprefs'd it by e, as Viroilius ;i'pyy -,
VAlmfs iavs ; and the Provincial Latin almost

con,?

contantly uses rpfor v, ,as Vafto to waste, inum .
Wine, Vallum a Wall, Mena a Wen, Vidua a Wi-
dow: To this we may add, that the Germans, and
most of the Modern Nations in Europe (except
our selves) pronounce it after this manner.

Query. Vnde Martiali qui tradidit orn Capiflro
Sic odis lufrs, 0 Hymenee, tuos.
Vnde Dioneam percurrere juffus arenab,

Cum femori Conjux conferit alma femur,
riget, 6 ad nullum urgit certamen amoris.
Se d jacet, ignavo crimen onufque toro ?
Anf. For a Frolick we'll anflver this Queflion
, l'Athenienne-.Faith and troth, dear Sir, we be-
lieve you are a naughty Man, and if the truth
were known,. a dealer in the Mathematicks,-a
Virtuoso in Natural Philofophy,-a Wag, a meer
Wag no doubt on't,-nay, we fancy you have red
Hair and a long Nose, but let that pass, we won't
be positive,-Why here is a Question with a Wit-
nefs--V'ade Martiali, tc. it is nothing in the
World but downright Bawdry and Obscenity,-
and as one of our Authors Paulus Horatius has it,
Objfenum eft quicquid extra Jcenam geri oportet, so
much by way of Etymology, to siew our Learn-
ing; you have indeed Sir, to give you your due,
wrapt up your Present in a clean Handkerchief,
and so forth,; but what of all that? You have
mistaken your Men, Sir; you have gone to the
wrong Houfe---We Athenians are a Set of morose
startch'd Fellows'; some of us are already in the
State of Matrifiony, by the fame Token, that
one of m has a Wife, that never Long'd but Jhe knew
the Person. The next are in a fair way to it;. ve-
ry pretty Rogues, and Swinging Fortunes let me
tell you, and we'll give them' brave Joyntures in
Baotia, and d'ye think now we'll answer such a li-

' '
. bi-

bidinous Qnuetion.-- So much to the Gentle:
man, to excuse our selves from answering him in
that scurvy Language call'd Latin, which is ten
times worse than Hebrew ;-As for the Englih
Reader, he may fatisfie himself that it is a pro-
phane wicked Question, and let the Lacedemoni-
ans do what they will, we for our parts will sow
none of your what d'ye call 'ms, your Cushions to
the Elbows of Iniquity: However, because we
will not spoil his Longing for good and all, he
may guess at the meaning of it by the following
Reply,

The Reason is plain, for he finds to his Sorrow
What was Mutton to day will be Mutton to morrow.r
Qu. Charus erat Phebo Corvwy , dilefEa Minerva

Notua ; Cur juntos odit uterque Dew ?
Anf. Garrula avis Phebo placuit, taciturna Mi-

nerve,
Invenit gratum sic fibi uterque Deus.
At periit prifcafque lepos & gratia junfis,

Bubo tacere nequis, tu uoque Corve loqui.

J
-
FIN I S.

i
v o

