4
2!L

4.' 0
7'- -
7 I,:

,-
? /
* tCae sl -. '- ,r.,,b er' A-.

9,-

           js[ Lit's (2'ESZ4R 2


           A- ,/i A ,

TH E
ROMAN HISTORY

FROM THE
FOUNDATION of ROME

TO THE
BATTLE of ACTIUM:

THAT IS,
To the END of the COMMONWEALTH.

By Mr. C R E V I E R,
Professor of RHETORICK in the College of BEAUVAIS,

Being the CONTINUATION of Mr. ROLLIN's Work.

Translated from the FR E N C H.

VOL. IX.
THE THIRD EDITION.
ILLUSTRATED WITH MAPS AND COPPBR-PLATES.

LONDON,
P)inted for J, RIVINGTON, R.BALDWIN, HAWES CLARKE
and COLLINS, R. I R aS FIELD, W. JOHNSTON, V. OWVEN,
T. CA S L ON, S. CRO WVE R, B. LAW, Z. STUART, ROBINSON
and .R o B £ s, and NEWBERY and CA R NAN.

MDCCLXVIII.

CONTENTS of VoL IX.

BOOK XLIII.

SECT. I.
cTHE true cause of the war between Cafar and Pompey

was teir ambition. Pompey, from his third Consul-
Jip, enjoyed an almost ab/olute authority in Rome. Ce-
far's pol.iy to prevent laying dwn his Command, when
he lad once got poOffeion of it. He makes creatuires
evry where. It was no longer time to attack him,
when iPompey resolved upcn it. Saying of Cicero upon
that fu'jed. The Cofil M. Marcellus proposes to re-
call Cajar. Some Tribunes, and the Consul Sulpicius,
oppJfe it. CfZfar geins to his party L. Pau'us and Cu-
rio oce defied Consul, and the ther Tribune, for the
nex yecr. Divers resolutions of the Senate, which are
oppjcd by the Tribunes in Cfar's interest. Two re-
mna,-kabe sayings of Pompey upon tbefe oppofiticns. True
po:n: from -whence to view Cfar's cause. Subtle con-
d., of Curio. WI/7en it is proposed to divest Cfar of
his Cimand, he demands that Pompey Jould be also
divested of his Command at the fame time. Affetled mo-
deration of Pcmpey. Curio puf/tes him home. The Cen-
for Appius endeavours to jligmatize Curio, butfails.
Pctnpey'sfickn:S. Rejoicings all over Italy on his re-
cov.ry. Two legivns took from C:.far, and delivered
over to Pompey. Pompey's presumption. Cxfar, on
the contrary, takes prudent mreafures. The Confu's leS
enemies to Cefar. He writes to the Senate. Curio's
address in bringing the Senate to what C far wanted.
The Confal Marcellus orders Ponmpey to defend the Re-
public againyf Cefar. Curio retires from Rome, and
goes to Cefar. Mark Anthony, being made Tribune,
replaces Curio. Cefar makes proposals for an accom-
modalion. nro agreement could possibly take place be-
tween Cf/ar and Pompey, because they both wanted a
war. Other letters from Cefar to the Senate. The
Consul Lentulus animates the Senate against CfJar. De-
tree of the Senate, by which Cfar is ordered to dband
his troops. Anthony opposes it. Violent debate. The
Senatufconfultum, used in the greatejt extremities, is

A z igid.

i?d. An;t.iony imakes of. C^fSir exhorts his soldiers
t7 r-venge thb: - icialed rigb:s of the T'ribu;ejhip. With
afi-ge li;n hl bgins t e vwar. Paage of the Rubi-
con. Cf;.r mak.s . it, f n:aft:r of Rimini. Terrible
coyie;-i'ation at Ro ;.e. P icnipy is universally reproached,
c;':d qaite di o:. certed. Pompey leaves Rocme; and is
fC.:'.'.':ei b t;.i e l.i;:irca!s, and the whole Senate. The
.;r:':zai's cf Pc r.:i y and CfaJr cc:mparsd. Cato alone
c 'ri.nJ t t'': Re:i.i. Pretended r-efages. Death
cf Prtre.a:. Pcn -:pey raifcs forces throughout Italy.
j.'r:;-,; Ch-r- - hso aci uitd.l: him. Insincere and
;..-;:" ;: t:!.:;i'i bet-:ecn Pompey and Cfar. La-
.' ;:is - Gs o'c to Po;npey. Cfar's progress. lie be-
f'¥ S D;i.;;!! .i;;' Co;jfi:.'i7. Domi;tis's troops promie
,5 d:.-..vr i- ir i:;;o Caar's hands. Letulus Spinther,
:.-c :.js ::i Cri,;:i., Gc lbtains pardon. Domitius re-

. p .n
. f His Phyfici::n, infead of pci-
:: :
r:
r Ii.;a a prjc.i Cefarpardons Domitius, and
i'e c.i' r ;':t; ,;i-.s. Cafjr pufuies YPoi;py, who Jhuts
, ,.; p ;I L:..e''..m. ANew fjcp taken by Caesar
' --.- , a pet ce. I has: foimtimes difgufed the truth
crf si::.- i7n is Coin;;en.aries. Cfrf;r bfieges Pompqy,
: .. ces ~cver to Eriru . Refiexion en Pompey's flight.
C.r- .- d::cr;i:.:d. to go i:to pain. fends Valerius into
.:;:: a; c;:.' Czuro ;to Sicily. T'. e Sardinians drive
cut Ccitt?, nd reai i-v'e alerius. Cato re!ires out of
aici.'y, .:!:CZ t fi.ig for Curio. Cicero's perplexity
a;:d u:c.-rtait,'. C.rjf r w-nts Cicero to go with him
to R ec, ad afpp;r in the Sna;e. Cicero refuses.
Cicero, as:er much dela, at last goes to Pompey's camp.
Cato j' :.'? b.!am:s th:at ftCp. CffJr comes to Rome, and
afJ,-, , eat imcderatici; in is jpeeches to the Senate and
PI ?p. He is i :t cb'e to do any tking he intended.
H- b cks cp: . :h pubiic treasury, spite of the Tribune

c,
-f;;. cftii ; an;d takes aay all the go!d and
f..'Jv-r t-* s. s th:i-e. His clemency is thought affected;
i.,.- · ,,- ,.f...., I
.r, T
:
_t . II. ;;, v-:orc 2: sis out fcr Spain, appo:nts
C:-;.;;:..::..,. ;:; 'i; .-:.iie ' La3,a, and fJveral pr6vinces.

-LrI.s:.'.': ::s Pis ga:ecs againil him ; he besieges it. He
: S .w;:c a :/;,ctc',:,d, v.od, to emp!oy it in his works.

He

Hfl leaves the conduSi of te siege to Trebonius, an. con.
tines his route to Spain. Pompey's forces in Spain.
,ifranius and Petreius encamp on the Segre, near Le-
r da. It appears, that Crfar's army was jtirc ' and
numerous. Gaulih cavalhy. lie jtlailens the enemy.
Eight, in which be does not fucc ed. He is in great
diffulties. He recovers isuperio.
He recs is He obliges the
enemy to leave their camp. He pu sues them, and pre-
vents their p.ffng te Ebre. Hie spares his enemies,
when he has it in his power to cut them to pieces; cbufing
to reduce them to lay down teir arms. ITreaty almost
concluded between the soldiers of te wo armies. Pe-
treius prevents its execution. Cruelty of that Lieutenant
of Pompey. Ctfar's cemnccy. The war renewed. Ce-
f/r, by harraf9ing and dr/ejrng his enemies, compels
them to surren;der. Interview of Afranius and Cejar
who iifit only on the di ja;:d'ig of the adversary troops.
That cond;tion is agreed to, and executed. Cofar easily
subdues Ulterior Spain; after whbch be goes before Mar-
feiles. Account of what had pased at thefiege of Mai -
feilles, in CGefar's cb/,nce. P, Mrqiy charged on the inha-
bitants of Marfe.lles, wilh little probability. Ccfar's
severe, but not cruel, behaviour to them. CGafar's prty
receives a ceck in llyr-icum. TFhefoldiers of one of Ce-
far's cohorts kill one a;zot.er, rather than surrender.
Curio pajes ov:r into Afj-ica, to wage war with Attius
l/arus, and Juba, King of Mauritania. Curio's fuc-
cess at firfi. Varus endeavours to debauch his troops.
'.rio's conitancy in that danger. His discourses to the
Council of war, and tIe soldiery. The soldiers pronife
fidelity. lle defeats Varus. uba ccmes to the assistance
6f arus. Curio'sprefumption. Battle, in which Cu-
rio's army is entirely routed. Curio makes hinfelf be
Ai':ed on the fpt. Unhappy fate of almost all who were
notc fain in the battle. yub.'s cruelty and arrogance.
]Resexion on te misfortune and rafinefs of Curio, 59

B OO K XLIV.
Sft. I. Cefar named Dislator by Lepid.is, Pretor of the

c;ty. Cefar's ninth legion mutinies. His rfolute,
l;ughty, bhavicur, by which h maknes the -mutineers

A 3 re-

return to their duty. Pride and indecency of Anthony's
or.du7l. Cf-jar comes to Rome, takes pcfeffion of the
D. latorhip, ct.fes bim;jelf to be ele ed Consul, andpre-
fides at the ele;ion cf the other Magiflrates. Regula-
tion infa-vur of d:-lors. Recall of exiles. The chil-
dren of prcjcr.b-d perf2ns refcred to the capacity of f/ev-
ing "ub'ic ¢fficcs. Motions of Celius and Milo. Their
dea;b. Pompiy's preparaticns; his land arm). Pom-
pey eco races mi.itary exerciSes by his own example.
General zeal and affetlion fr Ponzmpy's ca',fe. Afembly
of the S; nate held ly the C oufls at Tbfa'onica. Pom-
p. dec!ared /le hicf. Pompey's fecurty as to Cefar's
paj/ge ir:: Gre:ce. Cear's ecgernefs toget there. He
goes .a:- Greece with twenty thoujand legi naryfoldiers
a;:d f:x - u::dred hbrre. Hie djifatc-es 1Vi; uLius to Pom-
pey, with p-opoj'as fcr an cccnmmod ticn. He makes
bimn f mf.Jer cf a,;;cft all Epi;us. Pompey comes up
t:me E..:ogh o f.ae Drrachium, and encan;ps over-
agai;ft kis cd2e-i-ar", w.'th the river ApfUs btween
them. Pcpi;,v's se:t binders the troops Cfsar had left
in Ital frcm crffing tefea. Lib:d.s's death. Pom-

's. saj aj-ier to libulliu.s. New advczcn s cf Ce-
jar, c'-^ a s rs ecl'd. Cafar's forces at Brundulum are
dizla:t' r.n c::irg him. He goes himelf to feth them.
Fcii;:us Jpeecb c Crcl- to the mafier of the bark. Ar-

,d:urc' C,. sa'ss .'d:ies. On rceiving new ordrs, An-
i:. ;rp e frcr Itc v i;to Gre:ce w.'h fcur legions. Me-
tl.; S: c;z^i, irinirs to Pc;i;fe the SCrian le.icns. Ty-
;:i;:--: icaV':.:r,- cf that Proconsul. C'rfar feids
trfr .a: ,... :ts from his army into /Etlia, Th/:ealia,
ar.d lc-dc'I, a. Pcnimey avoids an engagem-nt. Ca-

r r..s. :;!
- id:lcj Pco:pey in lines. Divers aicons
c .::
::e li,:e:. Prodigtious valour of cne of CGfar's
cc'crf it., a;.: ai'C"' Jz cf the Cerit'ricn Scva. Incre-
a:.' p.-t: icte cf C. ar's tr:cfs, wvhtsn in -ant. Fruit-
.',- i. f:'t'. t
: ! egan l Cr with Scifio. Poipey's
s,:::. ,r , ru-h. h '.To Ga!nf fs/ Oic;s cf (C.far's
. e-r';.'
- :r. a.d ae.C'rni t Pcimp-i' with tbe weak parts
cr ,.::s '.-::':-:7'-s /i;.e:. Pcr;,'cy fcr-es Cx/f;r's I nes.
. .<.;- .tc;;...:-.-: : /:;-;.ct i;:to Theoa.zia. S]:ami and

,-: :f kisfr..i. P;n 2, cdavcd to gr c 'cr to I:aly,

co.ojes

choofes to fay in Greece. Ce/far joins Calitnus. His
various difofitions according to the different defigrs Pom-
pey might form. Cefar florms the city of GampLi in
Thefalia. Hefpares that of Metropolis. He comes to
Pharfalia. Pcmpey follows him, 95
Set. II. Ridiculous prefumpticn and cruelty of the parti-

fans of Pompey. 'heir murmurings at the prudent de-
lay of their General. Secret views of Pompey in fucb de-
lay. He leaves Cato at Dyrrachiui. The rea/ons for
this procedure. Cicero also continues at Dyrrachium:
Hisfharp andpeevilh railleries. Cefar endeavours to
come to a general engigement. Pompey, after many de-
lays, at length advances to meet him. Battle of har-
falia. Strange condu of Pompey. His flight. Cefar
forces the enemy's camp. Remarkablelaying of Cefar.
He pursues such as had Jheltered tbemelves in the adja-
cent mountains, and compels them to surrender. The
los CJcfar sustained in the battle of Pharfalia. His ge-
nerofity after vifory. He is well pleased with saving
Brutus. The battle of Pharfalia foretold at D)rrachium,
and known at Padua, in a very extraordinary, and al-
most miraculous manner: Pompey's fliht. He goes to
Mytelene to fetch his w ife. Diccurfe with Cratippus
on Providence. Continues his journey, and determines
to fetk protecion in Egypt. Goes there, and is affaf-
finated. Reflexions on his death ad character. His
murderers cut off kis head. His body is meanly buried
by one of his freedmen. L. Lentulus arrives in Egypt,
and is there killed. The conquered follow various inte-
refts. Cicero goes to Brundufiumn, where he waits a
considerable time for Cefar. Cato, at the head of the
greatest part of thefleet, advances towards Libyafor
intelligence. He hears of Ponpey's death by Sx. Pom-
peius and by Cornelia. Takes upon him the command,
and is received at Cyrene, 131

BOOK XLV.
Seft. I. Cfar pursues Pompey. Comes in fight of Alex-

andria and is prfent d with his enemy's head. He weeps.
lie enters Alexandria, where he fnds the people irritated
againfi him. Is there detained by contrary winds.

A 4 Takes

Takes ito consideration the difference betwixt te kirig
of Egypt nd Cleopatra his filler. The cause of this
nifunderflardir.g. Dijcontent of the Egyptian n;iters,
particularly f the eunuch PotLinus. Cleopatra comes to
Alexanria, and is intrcduced to CGfar. lTeir adulte-
rous coi:nimerce. Cfari declares Ptolemy and Cleopatra
jointA' King and ueen of Egypt. Ackil/as with the
Royal army ccm.s to beji;ge Cffar in Alexandria. Firfl
b,ttle. . fire conr es the greatest part of the Alexan-
drian ibrar. The war continued. Cfar causes Po-
tbin!s t be afaffna ed. He is a fcond time appointed
DiLatc-. Afinci, Cleopatra's fijfer, having intro-
duced herfeif into _Ac/illas's camp, procures his death.
hke war carried in under te dirdlion of the eunuch
Gan3:ed. C<far in great danger, fazes himself by
swimming. The dlexandrians demand the. r King of Ce-
Jar, w-o ret!urs h;i. Cefar rccdvt:s fspplies. Mi-
tbridates cf Ferga;;. v brings him a ctfiderable reinforce-
ment. C c,:r gos to join him. Last battle, v.herein
PtL. nmy is defcated and afterwards dr-wned in the Ni]e.
Redugiion of Alrxadr-ia and Egjt. The kingdom cf
Eg.pt given to Cleaira and hfrfjcond ircther. Cefar
de: ctes in, ^elf fr js re te to the cras; of Ci:cpatia.
He is oitiged :o Zit Egvft cn the r'c;: cf the pr-cgrefs
cf Pl'arnaccs i :A.a. CO;nlufon cf te amonrs o C-
far c.-d Cl ar.at-.. C.,,ar fe:t'es the affairs of Syria
and Ci.iia. Dejc.'.s j.es for pardon, nd party o-
tia:.! i'. Ph.-irc-, taking adzanitcge cf
tg e ci il war
t c;i7;ence Hc(;ji,;;is , gai;;s ccfidcrbl advanta;ges.
Deft:-?. Dcn:;.',!s Cal/v.;zs, Cfar's Lieitencnt. Cce-
far ccn:es .ad g.i;:s a 'iccry. Remarkable fayi;:g of
Cf/. r tl''-:c;:. :-c;al rzt.i and death of Pharnaccs.
C a',i-, i s reii' ' ; R;e,Jetl/es the assai:;s of Asia and
rafss great C5;:;re:i;!/tc;s. IHis ;a:di;;m Cn that head, 166
Sect. II. T-e C.::;.;- i; I i,.um between t-e partijars of

C.~!ri- c:d Iciic;;e. C:-.'C;iSs takes tlhns, n L4sl ra
;: Pi. ;-i~:77'.s, ./r Ca,'r. Death cf . appvis Clau-
di:s. Predi:_:, of t."e /';Z!. r;: oracle. S::;icius and
lac.l-rcs-.s mncre ch'i:re rc a 'c:.rit::;,za ex:e. Cowlnancy
cf l2fac:eltus. Cie;r' is i;.'! tct:d Zy his arctbci and
o.;the-. 4;; acco':i;t cf Ciccro's difjrietude during his

ftly

flay at Brundufiun. He goes to Cafar and is favotr-
ably received. State of Rome after the battle of Phar-
falia. Cafar appointed Ditfator, and M. Anhbony Ge-
neralof the horse Mifcondul cf Anthony. His rapine
and injustice. Commotions in Rome occasioned by Dola-
bella the Tribune. Cfar, on his return to Rome,
quells these troubles, without examining into past sass.
Cefar endeavours to raise money at any rate. Hle makes
a file of the effects of the defeated party, particularly
Pomnpey's, wkich are bought by Anthony. Difrontents
betwixt Cefar and Anthony on this head. Cafar in-
gratiates hbmfelf with the people. Rewards the leaders
of his party. Calenus and Vatinius appointed Confus.
CGfar causes himself to be nominated Dicator and Con-
fulf.cr the ensuing year, and takes Lepidus for his Col-
lgue in the ConfuJlhip, andfor his General of the horse.
Sedition among the veteran soldiers. Ciefar appeases it
by his rejolution. 'he principles of his conduE in re-
gard to his soldiers, 198

BOOK XLVI.
SeSc. I. lMetell.s Scipio comes into Africa, to meet 1arius

and Yula. His charcse. r. They are joined by Cato.
Cato's march throuth the deserts of Libya. He makes
Yuba fe;yble of Scipio's authority, by himself fubmittiin
to fe;-ve under him. He favcs Utica, wLich yuba
would have demnlihed, and jbf2ts himfif up there.
Stre:gth of the vanquijhed party in Africa. Cffar goes
into As i.a. His inconceivale dispatch. His caution
to cb-iate the vulgar fupeiftitions. He had at sift but
few rcops with him, and hose very ill jrovided. La-
bienus attacks hin. A great battle, wherein Casfr is
pat to great dijiicu!s:es. Aagnani;.ity of one of Labie-
nut's jcldiers, who was lately come out of javery. Ce-
far's difficu!tics and danigerousfiluation. 7Iuba bgi:s
/.is march to join Scipio. lie is oliged to return, to
the dt, fice f his kinvgdm, invaded ly Sittiis. C/iar
keeps cloje in his camp. lie endeavours to ingratiate
himnfi with the pcopi'e of the province. A great num-
bzr cf Getulians a;d Numidians desert and come to him.
Ze receives a reinforcenent of troops and provsifons.

( ago

Cato advises Sci io to protract the war, but feeing i
counsel rejected, repents having given up the command.
Scipi's cruelty to a Centurion and ome veteran ftldiers
of the enemy. A terrible florm, which greatly incom-
modes Cafar's army. Panic among CaJsar's troops, ot
tbe appracht of uba. Singular expedint made uJe of
by CefJar, to ercozrage them. Juba's pride and arro-
gance. Junltion of all Czfar'sforces. He puniftesfive
officers. A remarkable infiance of Cefar's activity. He
puts P. Ligurius to death, for having continued in arms
agairni ;.in, notwviJifanding the pardon granted him in
Spain. CAfar particulart- applies bitmftf t the difci-
pl-ning of bis troops. Battle of Thapsus. Memorable
engagcment of a soldier with an elephant. CGear pro-
ceeds to attack Utica. Cato is willing to defend the
town, but finds nbodcy dij/cjed to second him. hbere-
z!pgn having taken a reflution to dispatch himself, his
w: c.e attenticn is empl'.ed in securing the retreat of the
Senators that had accompanied him. Cato's lajt supper.
His death. Reflexions thereon. Cato truly valuable
fcr te mi'dr. efj, wh!ch accompanied his reJolution. He
msa b: co ri:red as one of the moftl vituus men Pagan-
i. m -e-r pirduced. iicxcufi;b!e behavicur to bis wife
,larcia. H5isfuneral. Cm;nenzdaticns bestowed on b.m
y ;'e ULic-fn. E.-prtcn of C.r-/::r, cn the news cf
;i dj:.t.'. ! iat mail be tought of Cfar's co;cern, in
zot l,:K.~g C.ci a.'e t5 /a :' bis life. Cffar enters
U:ica. Pa;-inj C:7to's i.n, a;:d impses a heazy tax on
t.'e R .-::. /.t..'. i:i :'.t city. tJuba's flight. Zama,
t1:: ;: c.'is fr his kingdm, fiuts its gates againfi him.
H :'.i
C'ih . 7Th conqueror meets wibt no further cppo-
fi:-cn. lle.il s Scipiofalls on is own jword. Nzimi-
d.a ;r':-'ced t a Roman prc-ince. Sallfl appointed
Gscve'i--r ;ls i!;, -were he -rules z ith great trann . C-
far's dirii:t:ic cf rewardst ar.d fpnij7;;ents. Hle puts
to death Fay.ftus yl.Ta and ,ifranius. His clemenc to
t.'e ref. He /j:s c fcr Rcr.n, h uctvizg fpt n end to
the ,-friccn G'cr, n i.:? ;, cr: than five mont-s, 227
Se*. II. Fl.z:tri:g dcrc:. c f the Snate. C.ffr having

r:li:.vd to :c;ake a irs'd uj'e f the uzreme pov:-:r, jo-
l;.:' .i:s^e,: -gs tiniif to it in his fpeecb to the Snate.

Re-

Refleogions on Cefar's plan of conduc7. He celebrates
four triumphs; for the vidories gained over the Gauls,
in Alexandria and Egypt, over Pharnaces and over
Yuba. Satirical refletions on Cfar, of an uncommon
licence, sung by the soldiers during the triumph. Re-
wards beflowed by Cefar on his soldiers. His bounty to
the people. Roman Knightsfight as Gladiators. Cdfar
engages Laberius top'ay a part in the Mimi of his com-
position. Laberius's/mart repartee to Cicero. Temple
of Venus Genetrix. Cefar's forum. Amount of the
fums carried by Cefar in his triumphs. Regulation
made by Cefar, for repairing the diminution of the num-
ber of citizens: againJf luxury: in favour of physicians,
and profejfors of the liberal arts. he Calendar reformed.
Cefar's conducf blameable, in what. He con/ents to
Marcellus's return. Cicero's oration on that occasion.
Unhappy death of Marcellus. The affair of Ligarius.
Cicero pleadsfor him. Cefar pardons him. Cicero's
constrained leisure. He employs it in the ccmpofition of
several works. H's concern, occasioned by the present
fiate of affairs, abates. His political conduet towards
Ce/ar. He gains the affetlion of Cefar's friends. Eu-
logium cn Cato compo/ed by Cicero. Cefar's Anticatones.
Cicero's exceive grief on account of the death of his daugh-
ter ullia, 282

BOOK XLVII.
Se&. . The troubles in Spain provefavourable to young

Ponmpey. Cafar comes into Spain. He composes afmall
poem dur.ng the voyage. Obliges Pompey to raise the
siege of Ulia. Besieges and takes Ategua. Reciprocal
cruelties. Battle of Munda. Death of Cn. Pompeius.
Sextus Pompcius saves himself among the mountains of
Celtiberia. Total reduetion of Batica. Voluntary death
cf Scapula. Cefar's dftributicn of rewards and pu-
nifhnz;:ts in Spain. oung Oflavius isferviceable to t-
veral with his uncle. Cefar takes all occasions toshew
him in public. Cfar's triumph, and the citizens dif-
content on that account. Cfar spoilt by the Senate'r
flattery. He is declared Imperator, perpetual DiCator,
&c. Extraordinary honours conferred on him. The
pr.';le e of conjtantly w;'aring a crown of laurel gives

khim

bim singular fatisfation. The reafan Cefar appointi
I;abius and Trebonius Confil for the three remaining
months. Caninius Confil for jeventeen hours. Cicero's
wi/ticifins on that oafin. C.rfar arbitrarily disposes
of all offices and e7ply;nentis. New Patricians. Con-
filar oramen:ts granted to ten wbo had passid the Pre-
torian dignit. Cefar appointed Con/ul for the fifth
time and Antbhny for his Collegue. Nomination of other
Mcgiirates. Cjefar prepares to make war against the
Piriianis. He forms feveralsehres, aln, al aly aYgrand
and agXr.fisent, 306
Sect. II. (,Lar's clemency. He refuses to accept of a

guard. Several circumftnances wiich render him odious.
His readirefjs to accept of honours, ad exorbitant pri-
i.tges. sArroó'ance in 'is difcczrfe, and behaviour.
DeLJre f Rovya!t. iIcrk Antbcny tenders the Diadem
to C r. Pilic re.;t;tei; to Cfr. Ccnfpiracy
aganji; his life. Brutus's cbhara-er. Caftus the firJt
contriver of the conpiracy. He engages Brutus, who
becomes te princip.al manager. Ti. are joiicd by Li-
gari us a.dj-'c ral of Cefar's fcrn:;r fri.i:ds. Bi iutus's
prnude,:e in tre choice of his as cirtcs. C.cero is not let
itto /t.c f.cre:. Trebonii:s prvt n's the affair bing pro-
josed ro Ar.thcny : and Brutus cpffes his being put to
d:.-tb with Cer. Tie ;;rmbcr of Ite Cifrpii ators in-
-reafes to ;~-i'tIrds of /xy. Several cf tbiir nalan s Sur.
frijig courrae cf Pcrci.a the wife of Bruts. Her hus-
bar.d .rts h-r i;!, tht e rt. 'The Co;iir ators determ:ne
ts kll Cair;- in f;.l Seiat. C<f-j iegrins to hcve so;me
f/?~,icicns cf B;its and Crcffus. lie rejees the pre-
di7zons cf a Scotlfv'er. Cefr' cinion as to hbat
kind cf d.atb is i.jl eligible. His wife Calphuinia's
fr:gklfu' dric.n. C.rfar is inclined .ot to go to the Sc-
n.lu-ic:', i.l l;ercf.cd- d to the contrar y
b D. Brutus.
An i;:aeiitc J,;.t .in of the coi'rac', tw.ich never
c7i: to hi.s ii:cw.'.-e.
RcfJ.:tiin aid tranq!i lity in
hi: Cci,ictirs. -1/-K i;cet ith jver.cl dijappvin.t-
e.;:s . Ct- ;-r's d.atb. lie fC../ s ai; iz efooC of Poc..pey's
fta:ue. D-i;,-rit oirions in re.rztion to C'af2r's tNurtber,

itiU'tcu aouit .' e dj:r ':d death. Brutus's cozndif re-
'pra S.c^b. i. Si'-t rtci-.;ss on Ctafar-'s cbaai'er, 330

Sea.

Se. III. Cefar's death occasions a great consternation in

the Senate and among the people. The Conspirators
take poflfjion of the Capitol. They are favoured by
the Senate. A considerable body of the people and the
soldiery declare for Anthoyy and Lepidus, the ch:efs of
the co;:trary party. Brutus endeavours to appease the
people, and treats with Antbony The Senate meets,
and decrees that C far's dcathJhall pass uirevenged, but
that his as fIal/ be confirmed. His will is to take
place, and his Juneral is ordered to be celebrated with
all imaginable honours. RecoIzciliation between Brutus
and Anthony. -The Governments of the provinces con-
ferred on the principal Conspirators. C/ear's will opened.
the people's affeHion towards him revves. ilisfune-
ral. Anthony fpcaks his funeral oration. The people's
resentment to the Conspirators. Ilehius Cinna is nzi-
takenfor the oiher Cinna, CGfaar's enemy4 , and torn to
pieces. Anthony enaeavu;-s to regain the Senate. He
procures a dcr-e to prevent a; aybufe being made of
Caefir's memoran.iu~ms or papers. AboliJes the Ditator-
Jiip. Puts thepre ended Mrius to death. The Senategrants
hin a guard, which he extends to fx thousand men. He
ve;:ds forged ats, piiblied in Cafar's nanie, and by that
ard o:her means, amajes immenfefums of money. Brutus
is in want of troops and money. he proje7 of a militaJy
ch fl for the use of the ConSpirators fails by Atticus's
rfu0f!l. They endeavour to strengthen their farty in the
provinces. The Conpirators quit Rome. Anthony takes
their gcv rnotnts from them ; gives Syria to Dolabella,
a:d ake, Macedonia for himlelf. O0Lavius's arrival at
Rme dooncerts 1is fciernes, 363

B 0 0 K XLVIII.
Seft. I. The Confpirato's imprudent condur the cause of

Anthony's rife. O0Savius comes and forms a party.
Frcm Apollonia, where he fir l heard of lis Uncle's
death, he comes into Italy and takes the name of Celfar.
Ile tries his /itl, by deceiving Cicero, who joins him.
His Mother is not able to prevail on him to renounce the
ficcefi.n to CGear. His fiift interview with Anbhony,
who receives him ve;y ill. He wants to be made Tri-

7 buns

hnte of the people: but Anthong' prevents it. He gains
the multitude by his liberality, and by bte feajfs be gives
them. Comet during Oftlvius's fporls. He fells all bi
inheritance from Cefar. Diffcrlties started by the Con-
fid. Their falling out and reconciliation. Otlavius is
acrufed by Antkiny of an attempt to have bh'm aaffinated.
Thby take arms. Anthony fends for the Macedonian le-
gions into Italy. He affetls to be popular. Otlavius
gains his Fatber's veterans. Brutus ard Caflius quit
Italy and go beyond sea. Porcia and Brutus's fepara-
licn. Cicero ets out on a voyage to Greece. But
changes his mind and returns to Rome. Cicero's firif
Pilitfiec. His fcond Phiippic. Anthony being ccme
to Bi unduunm offerds the soldiers by kis severity. He
rries at Rom:e withl the legion called the Larks. He
therr flrikes a trror. Trops a mbd by Otavius.
He is forsaken by tbe g ealefi art of them. He recovers
il-em by his prudence and mildness. 'wo of Inlhoy's le-
gicns come cer to Ctavius. Anthony leaves Rome. The
forces cf Anthory, cf Decimrns, and of Olavius. Otla-
-.us trd. rs is jeivice to te Snte a gains Anthony.
,iey accet bi:s cffir. Cicero's last engagements with
Oc'a i;s. A decree of the Senate whlicb authorises De-
cin;us cr.n Oica:us's il:tary preparations. Anthlny
bjeges Dccim::s in Mlcdrena. State of the Republican
pa; ty in tla'y. Bruus and Cafius go to totheens. Bru-
ius engags te yu'iig Rcmnn ftide.nts into his ferv.:ce,
He in ajhcrt ;ii,.e raises a poowerful arny. and rakes bin-
jrf ma.:-r cf Greece, &c. Cfiius goes into Syria, whilJf
Do.acl.'a jicps in .fia Minor, wblre he puts'Trebonius to
de,.rt. CT rs n. ake s ,imtlf mfler of Syria and of tweelve
legic . lie is ccn;miiled by the Senate to carry cn the
wSr itb Dclrle'.a, wl-cm be reduces to such fireights
that be k .s b.s.s. Tf
r e bors Sejanus. State of tbe Ro-
man crmies. The difpcfticns cf their Commanders.
Pa!e;nfs cf the fun during the whoe year of CGefar's
deatb. Se vi.ius Ifatricus's deoth. A remarkable in-
flarce cf his gravit', 387
Set. II. c-s
ca rfcjticns f the twvo Confiul, with regard

to tis f;ate of bte Repubi'ick. The Senate, orders a de-
pL:;tt: n to Anthony. Otavius is invfted with the title

and

and authority of Pro-pretor. Cicero beomesfurety for
him to the Senate. Intructions given to the deputies of the
Senate. The bad fucefs of the deputation. Atumult declared
by the Senate. Atflatue is decreed to Sulpitius. A new de-
putation to Anthony by the Senate. Cicero, whom they put
in tbe number of the d-puties, excufis himself, and thus
renders the affair abortive. Lepidus writes to th Se-
nate to exhort them to peace. Cicero oppoes it. An-
tbony's letter to Hirtius and Oflavius. Hirtius and
Oaavius approach to Modena. Pigeons employed to
carry and bring back dispatches. A fight wherein Pan/a
is wounded. Anthony in returning to his camp, is at-
tacked, and overcome by Hirtius. OClavius, who was
left to guard the camp, defends himself agairJf Lucius,
brother of Anthony. The Senate extols prodigiously the
advantage gained over Anthony. A new battle, where
the lines of Anthony are forced. Hirtius is killed. An-
tbony raiJes thefiege, and gains the Alps. OSTavius
does not pursue him. Difficulies in unravelling the in-
trigues of the times which followed the raising of thefiege
of Modena. The d.'ath of Panfa. Anthony is declared
an enemy to the Publick. the generosity of Atticus. he
Senate endeavours to pull down Otavius. An equivo-
cal expression of Cicero, with regard to young Cefar.
The opposite projets and interefls of Oftavius and the
Senate. The Senate gives Otavius a pretext, which he
makes usS of to declare himself. Otavius approaches
towards Anthony. He invites Lepidus and Pollio to
join with him. He aspires to the Confuljhip. Cicero
becomes his dupe, and supports him. Ihe Senate rejects
the demand of OEtiavius. The juncion of Lepidus and
Anthony. The Senate has recourse to Otavius: who
takes that opportunity to usurp the Confulhip. Com-
plaints of Brutus againt Cicero. 'hefoundation ofthe
town of Lyons, 434

BOOK XLIX.
SeSt. I. Oavius legally condemns all those who had killed

Cfear. Sextus Pompeius and Cn. Domitiu, who had
no part in the ation, are comprehended in the condem-
nation. Oflavius puts to death . Gallius Prteor of the
city. He makes the Senate revoke the decree against An-

thony

hibor and Lepidus. Theb misfortune and death of Ds-
cimus. Ozvius, Anthoni and Lepidus, unite tcge-
tber. Tei- inter-iew in ai iland f tle Reno. Tkey
wrangle about i. ofie wbom thbi ug;-t t prcjcribe. The
excbhage of Cicero's h:ad, agai:ot ihofe of the uncle of
Anthori, ad the brother of LP dius. The projia cf a
Triumrvirate. The marriage of Oavius with Anthony's
daught.r-in-law is refjlved upon. Prelude to the maf-
sacres. Gr.at terror i Rome. Tie deatb of the Cona
Jul Pedius. The en, ry of the three Generals into Rome.
A law to efabiYh the riumv.rate. Ike edis of the
profcr,pion. Tie profcriplicn of the Tr-ium;irn more
n.merous tan that of Sylia. A great many are pro-
fcribed on account of their riches. Affe.ition in the
choice of tle names placed at the bead of the catalogue of
tbe profrip:ion. Oa;zius as crul as is collgues, or
rather i;;crn Jc. The death of Cicro. Inveflives of
writers cf all forts agai:t Ainthio, upon the subjet of
Cicicr's eatb. 'Te reason wvy Oitavius has been
isared. Charalecr of Cice o. An expression of Brutus
(orcer,:;ig his death. C. Anitcnius killed by way of re-
prifal. f ie dcath of Qiintius C cero and h s son. L.
Cjrrjrav:dly bis fiftr, Anthony's mother. Lepidus con-
fen:s to tleJ ece of bis brother Paulus. qhe death of
Pollfo'sfath'r-in law, of the brotier of Plancus, and
cf 'cranius tutcr to Ossavius. 'ierres is projcribed. An
examsple of tbepiety cf Eneas renewed by te son of Op-
pgus. 'aroi- put into ujltdy by Calenus. Atticus
fi-a:cbed out of the lift of the prcfcribed. An elogium
of is prudence ad humanity. Mleffaila blotted out of
tee iur7.ber of the proscribed. Part.cvclar observations
upon jfmie of the proscribed. Fui;va ;m.akcs a figre in
the proscription. The public hatredfalls particularly
pcn Anthony. The odious triumiphs of Lepidus and
Plancus. Rcfuges opened to the prcfcribed out of Italy,
efpecia!y with Sextus Pomipeius. ExacSions of the Tri-
uzairate. A tax imp fed by them on the Idd es. Hor-
te;Si's speech upon this Jibjec7. enltidius is made Con-
ful. His furprizin fcrtr:e. Civic crow.::s decreed to the
friumviri. The Triuni iri fjear to observe the als of
CfJar. They appoint magifirates fcr- fiveralyears, 483

THE

[ I ]
THE
ROMAN HISTORY,

FROM THE
FOUNDATION of ROME

TO THE
BATTLE of ACTIUM.

BOOK THE FORTY-THIRD.
P Reliminaries to the civil war between

Cefar and Pompey. First campaign of
that war. Years of Rome 701-703.

S E C T. I.
The true cause of the war between Caear and Pomey was

their ambition. Pompey, from bis third Conful/hip,
enjoyed an almol absolute authorixy in Rome. Cfar's
policy to prevent laying down bis Command, when he
bad once got pofeffion of it. He makes creatures every
where. It was no longer time to attack him, when
Pompey reolved pon it. Saying of Cicero upon that
subjet. The Consul M. Marcellus propo/es to recall
Cefar. Some ribunes, and the Consul Sulpicius, op-

OL. 1X. B p.ji

pose it. Cefar gains to bis party L. Paulus and Curio, one
deftgned Consul, and the cther Tribune, for the next year.
Divers resolutions of the Senate, wbicb are opposed by
tre Trbu;ies in Cefar's interejt. Two remarkable fay-
in;gs of Pompey upon tbefe oppositions. True point from
whence to view C efar's cause. Subtle condutl of Curio.
rWhen it is pr(pofed to divest Cefar of bis Command,
he demands that Pompey bould be also divested of his
Command at the fame time. Affected moderation of
P6mpcy. Curio pu/hes him home. The Censor Appius
endeavours to stigmatize Curio, but fails. Pompey's
sickness. Rejoicings all over Italy on his recovery. Two
legions took from Cafar, and delivered over to Pompey.
Pommy's presumption. Cefar, on the contrary, takes
prudent measures. The Consuls elet enemies to Ce/ar.
He writes to the Senate. Curio's address in bringing
the Senate to what Cefar wanted. The Consul Mar-
cellus orders Pompey to defend the Republic against
Cefar. Curio retires from Rome, and goes to Cefar.
Mark Anthony, being made Tribune, replaces Curio.
Clear makes propoalsfcr an accommodation. No agree-
ment could pofiby take place between Cefar and Pom-
pey, because they botb wanted a war. Other letters
jrom Caesar to the Senate. The Consul Lentulus ani-
mates the Senate againf Cfar. Decree of the Senate,
by which Cefar is ordered to disband bis troops. An-
xbony opposes it. iolent debate. Tbe Senatufcon-
fultum, used in the greatest extremities, is iffed. An-
tbony makes off. C efar exhorts his soldiers to revenge
the io'ated rights of the Tribunehip. With a /ingle
eIgicn e bgins tie war. Pafage of the Rubicon.
Cfaor makes binfrif iafter of Rimini. Terrible con-
ftl, nation at Rome. Pc¢pey is universally reproached,
a;id 7uite disconcerted. Pomny leaves Rome ; and is
fol.'wed by the Magifjrate,, and the whole Senate. The
patizans of Pcmfey end Cefar ompared. Cato alone
a fried to the Republic. Pretended presages. Death
cf Perpirna. Pcmpfy raises forces throughout Italy.
LifFerc!t Chiefs who atl under him. Insincere ad
fi-.;tlefs negotiation between Pompey and CIfar. Laie-

- ns

nus goes over to Pmpey. Crear's progress. He be-
.ieges Domitius in Corfinium. Domitius's trops pro-
wife to deliver him into Cefar's hands. Lentulus Spin-
ther, who was in Corfinium, obtains pardon. Domi-
tius resolves to poison bimfetf. His Pbyician, instead of
poifn, gives him a soporific. Cear pardons Domitius,
and the other prioners. Cefar purfuts Pempey, who
huts bimfelf wp in Brunduium. New feps taken by
Cefar towards a peace. He ba sometimes disguised the
truth of fats in bis Commentaries. Cfar besieges Pom-
pey, who goes over to Epirus. Refleflion on Pompe's
flight. Ce/far, determined to go into Spain, fends Vale-
rius into Sardinia; and Curio into Sicily. The Sardi-
nians drive out Cotta, and receive Valerius. Cato re-
tires out of Sicily, withoutflaying for Curio. Cicero's
perplexity and uncertainty. Cefar wants Cicero to go
with him to Rome, andappear in the Senate. Cicero
refuses. Cicero, after much delay, at lal goes to Pom-
pey's camp. Catojuflly blames that /fep. Cefar comes
to Rome, and assets great moderation in his fpeecbes to
the Senate and People. He is not able to do any thing
he intended. He breaks open the public treasury, spite
of the tribune Metellus's opposition and takes away all
the gold andfilver befindsthere. His clemency is tought
asseted; but wrongfuly.

ADVERTISEMENT,
Concerning Cefar's Commentaries on the Civil War.
HT HE most compleat and authentic account we

have of the two first campaigns of the war bet,
tween Cafar and Pompey, is, without doubt, the
work universally known under the title of " Commen-
" taries of Cafar concerningthe Civil War." These
Commentaries carry Cafar's name, they have for ages
passed for his work, and Suetonius quotes them as
wrote by him.

B Notwith-

Suet. Ce. Notwithstanding, many learned men fufpe& they
n56. are not legitimate. The Grammarians, and those

whose refined taste enters deep into the delicacy of the
Latin tongue, pretend to find in them many incorrect
expressions, or which at least come not up to the ftan-
dard of elegancy. This is one good way of detecting
things that are spurious; and which, supposing the
sac, is of great weight; since, it is certain that no-
body spoke purer Latin than Cafar.

Juftus Lipfius, a good judge in these matters, au-
thorizes this reproach to the diction of he work we
ipeak of. * He observed, in this pretended Cefar,
he fays, many passages unworthy of the true Cefar.
Besides, he attacks in general the style, and manner
of the narration. " How cold," adds he, " is the
whole compofirion of this author, how unconnected,
how negligent! He rather endeavours to fay some-
thing, than really fays any thing: and is confe-
quently obscure, and intricate. The proper fault
of this writer is to fay little in many words."

These conjecures are certainly not to be despised.
And what adds to their force, is a palrage in the third
book, where the writer plainly diffinguilhes himself
I ib.m. de from Cefar. He speaks of proposals made by Libo,
B. c-. n. a Lieutenant-general of Pompey, for a truce. I C-
*7' far (it follows) did not think proper to give any an-

fwer to Libo's demands, nor do we now think it ne-
cefiary to give an account of them to posterity. ./-
bus rbius neque unc refpondendum Cjefar exifJimavit: xeque
runc rt memorie prodatur satis carfie putamus." The
persons, and times, are both diftinguilhed: and I do
not fee how any one can doubt, but that the paflage I
quote is of another hand than Cefar's.
-The expreflion itself, in the first person, is enough
to create suspicion. For we find no such thing in the

NMulta in Cafare ifio legi Cfare veteri parum digna. PlIuicla
noravi: fed univerfa quam frigida, aut Inhians & fupina, fpe tota
fcri?:io cft ! quam conatur potius aliquid dicere, quam dicit! Itaquc
obc riras & intricatio.-Proprium in eo fcriptore vitiuwn, dicere mul
tis, ee multa. LIPS. 1. I. Poliorcet. Dial. 9.

Com-

Commentaries on the Gaulish wars; where Cafar al-
ways speaks of himself in the third person. And yet
this suspicious turn is repeated, n. 92. of the fame
third book of the Commentaries on the Civil War.
Therefore it is, I think, clear, that this last work is
not wholly C&far's. I fay not wholly: for I will not
extend my suspicions beyond what is proved. After
a prescription of
ages, after the teimony of Suetonius,
who lived so near the time of its composition, how
can we wholly take it from Cafar ? Without doubt he
direced the work, he furnilhed the materials, he over-
looked it; but some body else held the pen. On this
supposition, I have made no difficulty to cite these
Commentaries as Cafar's, both in my text, and margin.
Surely he may be called their author, since they were
wrote in his name, on his memoirs, by his order, and
according to his mind.

SER. SULPICIUS RUFUS. A.R.7'o.
M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS. Ant.C.

51.
The true cause of the war between Cafar and Pom-
pey was, as every body knows, the ambition of these
two rivals in power and glory. This is what Lucan
* meant, when he fays, that Cefar could not bear a
superior, nor Pompey an equal. But this thought,
like many others of this poet, who was more ingenious
than judicious, is not just and exa&. Both thee fa-
mous competitors, whose quarrel divided the universe,
had in view the first rank. Pompey, who was in pof-
fefion of it, would not part with it; and Cafar wanted
to despoil him of it. He was not a man to be satisfied
with an equality, which indeed is in politics imprac-
ticable. He was endeavouring to make himself pre-
mier; nor can his sentiments on this head be doubted,
after the explanation he gave of them himself, when
in palling by a village of the Alpes he made that fa-
mous speech which I have mentioned in its place.
* Nec quenquam jam ferre poteft Cefarve priorem,
Pompius ve parem. Lyu. I. 23.

B 3 Pom-

A.. 701. Pompey had attained that envied height by trim-
Ant C. ming between the Senate and People. Without ab-

fclu:ly erpoufing either party, he had alternately
made use of both, as best agreed with his own interest
and elevation. His third Conlulfhip made some ala
teration in his conduct. Pleasid with the confidence
the Senate had shewn him, by putting the whole pub-
lic authority into his hands, he entered into a ftrit
union with that august body; and endeavoured to me-
rit their good opinion by making a proper use of the
entrusted power, and by taking efficacious measures to
restore peace and tranquillity in Rome. When out of
office, he preserved an authority inherent as it were in
his person. Though he had no title of Magistracy,
and was obliged as Proconsul of Spain to keep out of
the cilv, yet he governed 'all affairs, and influenced
all deliberations. He reigned indeed almost; but it
was by the voluntary deference of his countrymen,
not by force.
:-;et.Cas. In the&f circumftanccs, if Cafar had returned to
c '=: Rome a private man, as by right he hould, he must

have been subjected with the reft to Pompey's power,
which was supported by the whole Senate. He was
feared and hated by that body, whom he had on all
occafnrs induifrioufly attacked; and whom in parti-
cular he had treated with the utmollt contempt, when
he was Consul. Besides, his conduit gave his enemies
such hold, and he had so often violated the laws, that
he was aprehenllve of being profctuted, and con-
demned. Cato threatened him with it publickly, and
Pompey perhaps had the fame thoughts. We have
cbflrved that his law against Corruption alarmed Cz-
jar's friends, who thought it levelled at him. And
indeed Cfarr's whole policy aimed at keeping the
forces he had. After aving obtained the Govern-
n:ent of Gaul for five years, he got it prolonged fqr
ive years mre. He proposed to return home Con-
ful at the end of ten years, which was the interval pre-
firibced by the laws betveen the two Confulthips of
tee fame person. And, that he might go immedi-

ately

ately from the Command of an army to this second A.R. 70&.
Consulship, he had procured the unusual privilege of Ant C.
being excused from demanding the Confullhip in
person, and of being capable of a pomination, though
absent.

These steps made Cafar's designs so evident, thatId ibid.
the blindeft could not mistake th~m: and the reft of z6, S.
his conduct was of a piece. He used all forts of
means to make himself creatures: always attentive
to ingratiate himself with the People, he exhibited
games and gave an entertainment to their whole body
on account of his daughter's death: he began to
build a square, the ground of which, including with-
out doubt the edifices he was to buy and pull down,
cost above a million sterling: he doubled the pay of
his legions: he enriched his soldiers by immoderate
booty: in a word, he endeavoured by his unlimited
generosity to gain to his party the Military, the Ma-
giftracy, foreign Kings, Cities throughout the Em-
pire; and, had it been possible, the whole World.
So that it was very properly said, that he fubjeded
the Gauls with the iron of the Romans, and the Ro-
mans with the gold of the Gauls.

It was no longer time to attack so formidable a
power, when Pompey undertook it. He had com-
mitted one fault in leaguing with Cefar, and giving
him means of acquiring such strength; he commit-
ted another in breaking with him. Nothing can be
more judicious than the faying of Cicero which is in
every body's mouth: * Would to God, Pompey,
that you had never united with Cafar; or that
you had never broke with him! The first became
your dignity and probity; the other your pru.
dence."

However, Pompey a&ed at first very cautiously. sner. c;.
It was the Consul Marcellus, who (doubtless in con- Appian.
cert with him) commenced hostilities. This Magif- Dio, 1. 4.

Plut. Cxf.
*Utinam, Cn. Pompei, cm C. Cesare focietatem aut nunquam & Pomp.
coiffes, aut nunquam diremiffes ! Suit alterum gravitatis, alterum
prudentiax tu.e Clc. Phil. II. n. 24.

B 4 trate,

.R.70ot. trate, who was haughty and bold, published an o1-
Ant C. dinance; by which he declared, that he had some-

thing to propose of the utmost importance to the
Commonwealth: and in consequence of it proposed
to the assembled Senate to recall Cefar, and to order
him to quit the Government of Gaul on the firit of
March of the year they were then entering on; and
also to oblige him to demand the Confullhip in
person, and not by proxy. This'was pufting Cafar
home; who would have been ruined, if the two
points proposed by the Consul had been carried a-
gainft him, and put in execution. But it is plain he
was able to make a good defence under the safe-guard
of two laws, of whose benefit they endeavoured to de-
prive him. They cut off two years of his Command
from the term enlarged by the law of Trebonius;
and they took from him a privilege granted by ano-
ther law, made by the whole college of the Tribunes,
and with Pompey's conefnt.

Under there favourable circumstances, it was not
difficult for Caesar to procure assistance from many
of the Magistrates. Not only some of the Tribunes
declared for him; but even the Consul Sulpicius, a
peaceable man, who by his profeflion of a Lawyer
was accuffomed to refpet tcrupuloufly whatever bore
the name of a law, opposed his Collegue. Pompey
himself, inured to hypocrisy and tergiversation in
what he most desired, affected to fay, that Marcellus
went too far; and that it was not proper to affront so
grossly such a person as Cfar, whose exploits had
been so glorious and serviceable to the Republic. And
truly Marcellus's zeal was extravagant; and sometimes
favoured of animosity and hatred. Cfar had granted
to the city of Come in Ciialpine Gaul the freedom of
Italy; by the means of which, those who had borne
the office of first Magistrate among them, became
Roman citizens. Marcellus had a mind to strip the
inhabitants of Come of this privilege ; pretending it
had been given them without lawful cause, merely
through Cfar's a:nbition and desire to make crea-

tures,

tures. perhaps he was in the right. But he went fb A. R. 7t.
far as to cause a Burgess of.that town, who had been .t-
its firt Magistrate, to be fcourged; bidding him go
to Cacfar, and hew him the marks of the stripes.
This was a punilhment from which Roman citizens
were always exempt: therefore by this aion Mar-
cellus annihilated the privileges of the colny Cefar
had founded. But he got nothing by so doing: it was
only a wanton, fruitless, insult.

Pompey, who outwardly preserved more modera-
tion, aimed at the fame mark. Though he had seem-
ingly disapproved the Consul's proposal, he laboured
to get it passed the next year. In this view he got
elected Consul C. Marcellus, cousin to Marcus, who
was a man of the fame principles. He thought he
had carried a great point too in procuring the famous
Curio, whom we have had occasion to mention several
times, to be made Tribune: he was a young Gentle-
man of fire, one of the first Orators of his time, and
had always acted as Cefar's enemy.

Cafar, who was at least as artful as his competitor, Plut. &
opposed a counter-battery. He tried to gain over C. Appian.
Marcellus; but finding him incorruptible, he eflfyed cl. ad
L. Paulus, who had been appointed his Collegue
and bought his silence for about three hundred thou-
sand pounds sterling. Paulus was paid this great fum
for only not acing against Csfar: and he employed
it in building a magnificent Hall at Rome, as if he
intended to eternize his venality and bafcnefs.

Curio fold himself at a yet higher price. He had
never the publick at heart, and had only joined Pom-
pey, because he had been (lighted by Caesar. It is
furprizing that Caesar hould have made such a mif-
take, contrary to his maxims; he who used all means
to attach to his party even sometimes the lowest men.
He perceived his error, and spared no cost to retify
it. Curio had hurt his fortune by his debauchery
and prodigality; he owed then above fix hundred Val.Max.
thousand pounds sterling. Cafar paid all his'
debts; and thus Axed in his interest a man who

did

A. R. 7or. did him the greater service, as he affected (as we hall
A"'. C fee) afort of impartiality.
CA. ad Mean while the Consul M. Marcellus pursued his
cic.& . plan, which he had only moderated and -qualified.

He doubtless conformed in this to Pompey's advice,
who did not chue that any resolution hould be made
about Cwafar, before the first day of March of the next
year; after which time he thought a fucceflor might
be ent him. I cannot fee what foundation Pompey
had to believe that he should be suffered to take one,
any more than two years, from Cafar's Command.
However, his will was so much the rule of all things,
that, as he had a journey to make to Rimini, the Se-
nate waited till his return; and on the last of Sep-
tember came, in his presence, to a resolution agreeable
to his withes.

In this resolution it was said, that the Consuls ele&,
L. Paulus and C. Marcellus, should on the firt of
March on the year then entering upon propose to
the Senate, to deliberate on the affair of the Consular
provinces. (Which was a studied expreflion, to avoid
laying plainly that they were to deliberate on Cafar's
revocation.) It was also added, that, when the first
of March was come, nothing should be proposed pre-
vious to, or in concurrence with, that of the Consular
provinces. And as an opposition was apprehended to
the decree, which was actually drawing; the Senate
declared, that none of those who had a right to put
a negative on its decrees, ought to exert that privi-
lege on this occasion: and, if any one did, he would
be confidered as guilty of an attempt on the tranquil-
lity and safety of the Republick. That this resolution
should be registered: and that the Senate should con-
fider what course to take with its opposers. All these
declarations, and menaces, did nor hinder four Tri-
bunes, among whom was Panfa, who had long served
under Cxfar, from making their formal opposition.

By a second resolution of the fame day, the Senate
endeavoured to weaken Cefar, by bffering discharges
to such of his oldicrs whfi;e tine of service was comr

Fleated,

pleated, or who for other reasons desired to be dif- A.R.7ox.
banded. And lafly, a third resolution took into st,.
consideration the choice of Governors of the Propre-
torial provinces, and conformed it to the regulations
last made under the Consulship of Calvinus and Mef-
fala, and ratified the following year. Things were
now in order. But we have elsewhere hewed what
reason Caesar pretended to have to complain of these
new resolutions. The two last met with the fame fate
as the first; Panfa and another Tribune opposed
them.

It was easy to foresee that these oppositions would.
prevent the effect of the deliberations projected for
the next year with respect to Ca:far. Some-body
having made this objection to Pompey, he opened
himself by this answer: " I fee no difference between
"' Cafar's disobeying the decrees of the Senate, and

his hindering the Senate from making what decrees
' they think necessary." " What if he is determin-
" ed," replied another, " to be at the fame time Con-
" ful and have the Command of an army ?" " And

what," returned Pompey briskly, " if my son was
" determined to beat me ?"

These answers of Pompey, particularly the last, ap-
peared harsh to Calius; who mentions them in a
letter to Cicero. But I will venture to affirm, 'that
they fix the true point from whence we ought to view
Cafar's conduCt, in order to make a proper judgment
of it. He aimed at the Sovereignty of the Common-
wealth; the event proves it. He was then the son
who intended to beat his father. But he skilfully
conceals, as much as pofible, the odious design. He
covers himself by the laws he gets made by force or
intrigue. He screens himself by the authority of
venal Magistrates, corrupted by his bounty. By
these means he throws a colour of legality over his
ambitious proceedings. What is all this but the be-
haviour of an undutiful son; who, being resolved to
disobey his father, and willing also to avoid the im-
putation of disobedience, flops his mouth to prevent

his

A R.o. his speaking ? It is by the light of these reflections
% 1 that we ought to view all the chicanery by which

Cafar defended himself against the Senate above
another year, before he proceeded to take up arms.
And, that we may not be imposed on by specious
appearances, it is sufficient to call to mind the fa-
vourite maxim he always had in his mouth, borrowed
from Eteocles in Euripides: " If justice may be
violated, it is to acquire Sovereignty that it is glori-
ous to violate it; in all other things a honestly."
A. R. 702. ,. IEMILIUS PAULUS.
Ant. C.
5,. C. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS.
Dio. Curio was the instrument Caesar made use of to dif-
Appian. pute the ground with, under the Consulship of Paulus

and C. Marcellus. This Tribune, who was a man of
fcnfe, skilfully concealed his hameful desertion of his
party. He was very quiet at the entrance into his
office; speaking even occasionally against Cxfar ; yet
throwing out frequently untoward propositions, that
could not but be difplcafing to Pompey and the Arif-
tocratic party. But soon after he fought occasions to
break with them; and, in order thereto, proposed
divers laws, which he knew they would not fail to
oppose. One of these laws regarded the high-ways:
another was a fort of Agrarian law, little different from
that of Rullus, which had been thrown out in Cicero's
Confullhip: and a third concerned corn and provi-
sions. And, in the new regulations he projected on
all these heads, he reserved to himself the chief
management and authority. The Senate opposed
these laws. This was what the Tribune wanted; he
thought himself now freed from all consideration for
a body, by which he pretended he was aggrieved.

He would not however appear an absolute partizan
of Cafar: wherefore, when the first of March was
* Em ;l ylóan X, vrvniiH "r" x«X>. tir 1asim. T'«M a Ji f irtcn> Xr.
These two Greek verses have been thus translated by Cicero. " Nam
i vioiandum eft us, Regnandi gratia violandum eft. allis rebus pieta-
tem colas.' Cc. de Off. III. S.

come;

come; and the Consul C. Marcellus, in conformity A.. 7or.
to the resolution of the last of the preceding Septem-. Art c.
ber, had proposed to fend a new Procorful to Gaul;
his Collegue Paulus, according to agreement, hold-
ing his peace; Curio spoke. He praised the propo-
fal of the Consul Marcellus; but added, that they
ought, at the fame time that they recalled Cafar, to
order Pompey too to resign the Government of Spain
and the Command of the Legions in that province.

This was a specious, favourable, turn; it was the
language of a zealous Republican. The dexterous
Tribune represented, " that what he proposed was the
only means left to insure the publick liberty. That,
if they disarmed Cafar only, Pompey with the forces
he had the Command of would become absolute maf-
ter of the Empire: whereas, if they were both re-
duced to a private condition, the Republick would
have nothing more to fear from either. But that, if
they continued one in Command, they ought to leave
the other wherewith to preserve the balance." These
arguments, set in the strongest light by one of the
most eloquent men Rome ever produced, made a deep
imprefion. The People, among whom Pompey had
loft ground by his laws against Corruption, approved
and applauded Curio; who thus did Cafar the greatest
service, by affecting to be neuter, and solely attached
to the good of the Republick.

I fay he did Caesar the greatest service; for he knew
Pompey would never resign. This was neither his in-
tention, nor that of the best heads in the Senate. And
indeed the terms were not equal, as Pompey did not
enter on the Government of Spain until four years
after Cefar had commanded in Gaul. But the chief
and molt essential difference arose from the diversity
of their character and conduct. Every thing was to
be feared from Cefar's unbounded ambition; whereas
that of Pompey was more moderate, more circum-
fpet, more capable of respecting the laws. Curio's
proposal was accordingly rejected: but he hindered,

2 by

AR .7. by his authority as Tribune, that of the Consul from

-, pating.

Pompey, on this attack of the Tribune, asseted at
firit great moderation. As he was in Campania, he
wrote to the Senate, " that whatever title, or power,
he had, was the effe& of the good-will of his fellow-
citizens; not of his own follicitation. That, without
his seeking, they had offered him a third Confulhip,
and a prolongation of his Command in Spain. That
he was ready freely and voluntarily to resign, what
he had accepted againit his inclination." At his re-
turn to Rome, he talked in the fame itrain; and as if
he, as the old friend and father-in-law of Cafar, was
better acquainted with his disposition than any one; he
affirmed, and made it a matter of honour to himself,
that he too had the fame way of thinking. He said
that Csefar, satiated with war and vi&ory, desired re-
pose alone; and wished for nothing more than to re-
turn to Rome, and enjoy in the bosom of his country
the reward of his labours, and the honours he had
merited.

He spoke not what he thought either as to himself,
or Cafar. But he designed to render odious by his
moderation the tenacity of Caesar. He gave up five
whole years of Command, and Cefar refused to lay
down his, though expiring, unless he entered directly
on the Confulihip. Curio was not to be thus imposed
on. He called upon him to fulfil his promise by an
immediate resignation. He renewed his former de-
claration about the only means of preserving the li-
berty of the Republick; which was to take, at the
fame time, all Command both from Pompey and
Cafar. He exhorted the Senate to order them both
to resign, under pain of disobedience; and, in cafe
of refusal, to declare them enemies to their country,
and raise forces to reduce them. And, as he perceived
his advice would not be followed, he broke up the as-
fembly, without suffering any resolution to be taken
as to Caesar.

Pompey

Pompey now repented heartily that he had railed A.R. ~
the Tribuneship out of the state of humiliation to A't. c
which Sylla had reduced it. But it was too late, and
all he could do was to endeavour to revenge him-
self on the Tribune, by the ministry of the Censor
Appius.

For all circumfiances induce a belief, that this Ma- Dio.
giftrate undertook by agreement with Pompey to ftig-
matize Curio. He had great openings, had he attack-
ed him on account of the conduc of his youth, which
had been wafted in luxury, extravagances and de-
bauchery. But Appius was flopped short by the op-
position of his Collegue Pifo, and of the Consul
Paulus. The other Consul Marcellus, always ready
to at against Cfar and all his Partizans, resumed
the affair; and pretended to bring it before the Se-
nate. Curio opposed at first so unusual a proceeding.
But afterwards, finding the generality inclined to fa-
vour him, he accepted the condition, and ubmitted
himself to the animadversion of the Senate. He was
not deceived. In vain the Consul Marcellus made a
bitter inve&ive againit him; the majority of the Se-
nators declared for Curio: and the Consul would not
go through a deliberation that couldnot turn out to
his honour.

While the difference between Pompey and Cafar
increased every day, it had like to have been on a fud-
den terminated by an unforeseen accident; this was
a dangerous illness that was near taking Pompey off:
which, as Juvenal fays, * would have been very
lucky for him, had it so happened, that when he was
at the height of prosperity and glory; as it would
have spared him the cruel misfortunes, which two
years more of life made him experience. It was at
Naples he fell ill; and, when he recovered, the Nea- Plut. P1m
politans shewed their joy by festivals and solemn

* Provida Pompeio dederat Campania febres
Optandas: fed multz urbes & publica vota
Vicerunt. Igitur fortuna ipfius & urbis
Servatum viito caput abitult.--JVY. Sat. x.

thanks-

A. R 71. thanksgivings to the Gods. No such thing had been
A. c. done before to any Roman. But, the example once

set, it ended nt where it began. The neighbouring
cities firt followed it, and afterwards all Italy. Par-
ticularly on Pompey's route to Rome, when he re-
turned, no place was large enough to hold the crowds
that came to meet him. The roads, the villages, the
ports, were filled with an incredible multitude of per-
sons of all ages and conditions; who offered sacrifices,
and amidst their wine and good cheer extolled him
whom Heaven had restored to them. Many adorned
with garlands, having flambeaux in their hands, met
and accompanied him; throwing flowers on him with
general applause: so that his whole progress was one
of the fineit fights that could be imagined. These re-
joicings, which seemed to express the greatest esteem
for, and attachment of all the Italian people to, Pom-
pey, encouraged him much; and for that reason may
be confidered as one of the chief causes of the civil
war. Until this time an extraordinary prudence, ap-
proaching ometimes to timidity, had guided, and fe-
cured, his steps. But now, dazzled with joy and con-
tience, he no more saw any reason to fear, or doubt.
He thought himself strong enough to despise Cefar;
and flattered himself that he should be able to ruin
him, as easily as he had raised him.

These notions, which took up his thoughts, were
confirmed by the discourses of those who brought him
two Legions, that had served under Caesar. The
fa& is this:

The Senate, taking advantage of the general ap.
prehenCion of an irruption of the Parthians into Syria,
ordered that Pompey and Cefar should each of them
furnish a Legion to be ent into that province. This
pretence was so well imagined and seemed so fair, that
the decree palled without opposition or difficulty. But
Pompey obeyed that decree, only by giving the Le-
gion he lent Cafar after the disaster of Titurius and
Cotta. Cfar was obliged to give one of his own, so
that this was in reality taking from him two Legions.

He

e was aware of it; yet he sent the two Legions with A. R. 701.
at g nerofity which always gave him ah air of fupe- Ant. C.
oriy over his adversaries; having firffprefented the
ldiers with about ten pounds each. The persons
ompey sent to conduct these Legions to him reporteds
at Cafar was extremely hated in his army : that his
Idiers, tired out with a long, laborious, war, could
ot bear a General, who had never suffered them to
njoy any reft: that Pompey would not have occasion
r any other forces than those of Cafar to vanquish
nd ruin him; because they would certainly abandon
im the moment they set foot in Italy. About the
me time Labienus, the most experienced and best
seemed of Caesar's Lieutenant-generals, listened to
ffers for changing fides, which he atually did
fterwards.
These various events made Pompey so prefump-
uous, that he took no care to assemble a force futfi-
ient to make head againit the enemy he had to deal
ich. He even laughed at those who were afraid of
war; and somebody telling him, that, if Cafar took
t in his head to march to Rome, there was nothing
o hinder him; Pompey answered, " In whatever part
of Italy I stamp with my foot, there will come up
Legions."
Caelar's conduc was very different. Without tak- De B.
ng any glaring ftep which might be confidered as anGU' viii;
oftility, he prepared every thing so as to be able to
at with vigolur, when the time was come. Gaul was
in a state of perfect tranquillity. His legions, in
their several quarters, only waited his orders. He
himself came into Cisalpine Gaul early in the spring,
that he might be nearer Rome, and have an eye on
what passed there; but under pretence of aflifting with
his interest Mark Anthony, who had been his Qu'ef-
tor, in his application for the office of Augur. For
that country was full of municipal towns and colonies,
whose inhabitants had the privilege of Roman citizens,
and consequently influenced the nomination of Ma-
giftrates and Priests. Cafar learnt on his way, that

VOL. IX. C Anthony

A.R. 71. Anthony was appointed Augur. This pretence there-
Ant . fore failing, he fubitituted another; which was to

take that opportunity to engage the votes of the peo-
ple of these cantons for himielf, with refpet to the
Consulship; for which he intended to be a Candidate
the following year. He even sent to Rome many of
his officers and soldiers, who had leave of absence
from him as it were to look after their private affairs.
P:ut. And history mentions among others a Centurion, who
P°nP'; being at the door of the Senate while they were deli-

berating about Cefar, and informed that they re-
fused him the time he demanded; put his hand to
his sword, faying, " This hall give him what the
" Senate denies."
,e . Caesar was the more cautious, as the Consuls ele&t
C-i . i. were of the contrary party. Ser. Galla, who had served

under him as Lieutenant-general in Gaul, had made
a fruitless effort; and Pompey's interest had fixed the
suffrages of the People in favour of L. Lentulus and
C. Marcellus, both enemies to Cafar, but particu-
larly the first; who kept no terms with him, and
shewed himself determined to carry things to extremi-
ties. However, as Curio was a good check on every
one, Caesar thought he might return to Gaul. There
he reviewed his army, and spent the remainder of the
iummrer; and at the approach of winter, leaving in
Gaul eight legions, (four in Belgium, and four in the
country of the. idui) he returned into Italy, where he
distributed the thirteenth legion in all the important
poi{s of Cisalpine Gaul.

When he came there, he was informed, that the
legions that had been took from him under pretence
of fending them againit the Parthians, had been de.
tained in Italy, and transmitted to Pompey by the
Consul Marcellus. This was little less than a decla.
»;:er. Czf. ration of war. He dissembled however his resentment,

-2. and contented himself with writing to the Senate; de-

firing that they would not deprive him of the benefit
conferred on him by the People; or that the other
Generals, as well as he, might be obliged to dilband

the
8

their troops. This language, conformable to Curio's A. R. 70?
proposal, could not prejudice Cfar, as we have ob- Ant. C
served; and besides Suetonius remarks, that he
hoped, if he was took at his word, to be able to re-
aflemble his veterans, before Pompey could make new
levies.

It appears, that this letter from Cfar gave cca-Appian.
sion to a last deliberation of the Senate on the refpetive
pretensions of the two rivals. Marcellus put the pro-
poition in a light that was advantageous to his views,
and aked the opinions concerning Pompey and Ca-
far separately. The majority were for fending Cefar
a successor; and, when the question was put as to
Pompey, the majority were for continuing him in
Command.

But Curio, reuniting what the Consul had separated,
nfifted that the Senate hould be asked, Whether it
was their pleasure that Pompey and Caesar should both
at once resign ? The question thus stated took another
turn; and the Tribune had three hundred and seventy
oices against twenty-two. This threw Mkrcellus into
efpair; who broke up the Assembly immediately,
rying out aloud, " Ay, triumph over us, and m.ke
Cllar your Master." The Tribune, on the other
de, retired, full of glory; and was received by the
eople with great acclamations. They even threw
owers on him, as a vi&orious champion who deserved
arlands.
Marcellus, when he dismissed the Senate, told
hem, that it was no longer time to amuse themselves
ith vain harangues, when ten legions were ready to
ass the Alpes; and that the Commonwealth wanted
protetor able to refill such an attack. In confe-
uence of this declaration, being accompanied by the
onfuls ele& (the better to authorize the important
ep he was going to take he went to Pompey, who
as in the suburbs, because, as Proconsul, he could
ot come into the city; and, giving him a sword,
id, " We order you to use this sword in the defence
of your Country againfl Cafar: we inveft-you with

C " the

A.R. -oz. the Command of all the forces in Italy, and give
ant c " )you power to raise what forces more you may think

"proper." Pompey answered, he would obey the
Consuls; adding, however, " unless something better
" may be thought of." This was a common expef-
sion with him, and was less a sign of irresolution, than
of a fly caution that loved to ave appearances, that
feared engagements, and always chose to have a power
of declining them, if necessary. There is no reason
to doubt but that Pompey was on this occasion fully
determined; and he declared himself to this purpose
Cic. ad to Cicero, who was then just returned from Cilicia, and
At:. 7. . with whom he had two conferences in the month of

December that year.

Curio made ome other attempts in Cafar's favour,
and endeavoured to hinder Pompey from raising
forces. But he got nothing by there frelh efforts, and
only incensed the Senate more and more against him;
and as his Tribuneship was near expired, and he
thought his person would be in danger as soon as he
was out of office; he fled from Rome, and went to
Crefar at Ravenna; full of animosity, and importu-
nate to have him immediately fend for his legions and
benin the war.

Casfar, who was as determined as he, but more
discreet, did not think it was yet time for aion.
He feared the odium of beginning a war, which to
all the world could appear to have no other objea
than his peronal interest. He waited for some event
which might give a better colour to his hoflilities
against his Country; and chose to be thought to have
tried every means of accommodation before he had re-
course to force. He therefore negotiated on one hand;
and, on the other, raised up against Pompey and the
Senate a new Tribune, at least as violent and passionate
as Curio.

This Tribune was the famous Mark Anthony,
who, at his return from Syria and Egypt, had em-
braced Caesar's party. Being nominated Questor, he
set out immediately for Gaul; without faying for the

Senate's

Senate's decree, the People's order, or the decifionA. R. 701o
of the lots. * He knew, as Cicero has very justly Ant
observed, that Cafar's camp was the only asylum for
those, whom indigence, debauchery, and heavy debts,
made discontented, and enemies of the public tran-
quillity. He behaved there gallantly; and we have
had occasion to mention him several times in relating
the Gaulish wars. Having this year obtained the Tri-
bunefhip by Cefar's interest, ahd money, he employed
all the authority of his office in the service of him to
whom he was obliged for it.

He began, by demanding that the two legions de- Plut. Ant.
signed to be sent against the Parthians should be or-
dered to Bibulus in Syria; that Pompey mhould be
forbid raising any forces; and that such as he inlifted
mhould be freed from military obedience. On the
twenty-firft of December, that is, twelve days after
he entered on his office, he made an harangue to the
People; in which he insulted, and inveighed againit,
Pompey; reaping up his whole life, from his in-
fancy. At the fame time, he deplored the fate of
those who had been condemned in consequence of the
laws made by Pompey in his third Consulship. To
all this he added plain menaces of a civil war. On
occasion of which harangue Pompey, reasoning with
Cicero, said very justly: " What would not Cefar
" himself do, if he was at the head of affairs; since
" his Quaestor, who has neither money nor credit,
I dares talk in this firain ?"

In the midst of this ill-blood, negotiations (as I Plut. Cxf:
have said) were set on foot. Cafar offered to disband APPia''

Cic. ad
eight of his legions, and to quit Transalpine Gaul, Fam. 6.
provided he was left in poeffieon of the other Gaul'
and Illyricum, with two legions, until he was appointed
Consul. Afterwards, by the mediation of Cicero, who
ardently desired peace, Cfar's friends made a further

Id enim unum in terris egeftatis, eris alieni, nequitiae,--per-
fugium effe ducebas. Cic. Phil. II. n. 50.
t Quid censes fa&turum effe ipfum, li in poffefionem Reipulica
venerit quum hac Quxftor ejus, infirmus & mops, audeat dicere ?

C 3 concef-

AK. 7o. conceflion, and engaged he Ihould be satisfied with IU,

,. lyricum and one legion.
Cic. adAt. But what method could be found to make two men
7' 9 agree, who both chore a war ? Cafar's offers, by no

means, evince a ficere intention for peace. If he
had really desired it, there was a sure way to have ob-
tained it; which was to have resigned his Command,
on condition he was appointed Consul. Cicero ex-
prefsly declares, that, if he had insisted on nothing
more, he could not have been possibly refused. But
Caesar would never reduce his pretensions to these
terms. Pompey on his fide had as little inclination to
leave Rome, and go to his province of Spain.

The disposition then of Pompey and Cfar to war
was equal; with this difference, that Pompey, who
had with him all the majesty of the Republic, and
doubted not of the goodness of his cause, pretended tq
give law, affected severity, and avowed his resolution
to oblige Cefar by force to submit to the Senate:
whereas Caesar, taking advantage of the known inten-
tion of his rival, made continually concessions which
he was sure would be rejected; hoping by so doing to
throw the blame on Pompey, and give to his own pro-
ceed:n/s an air of moderation, which might in some
Iorr compensate for their injustice.
AR. ::. C. Ci AU"IUS MARCELLUS.

- '- L. CORNELIUS LENTULUS.
CwC. c.B (. n the firif of January Curio came to Rome, with
civ. i. letters from Caesar addressed to the Senate, which
ic ;. 4'contained very fair and moderate proposals, in the
p.u:. opinion of himl who made them, and which were pro-

bably agreeable to the conditions of the accommoda-
tion aft mentioned. These letters were so ill received,
that the Consuls, not being able to suppress them, as
Curio had delivered them in full Senate, had a mind
to return them unopened: and the Tribunes Anthony
* (Cz£r) expelabt le nimmis fuis poftulatis reponfa, Cs.de B.
Civ. . 5.

and

and Q. Caflius were forced to exert their whole au. A.R. 703.
thority to procure them a reading. After they were Ant. c
read, the Consul Lentulus proposed to deliberate, not
on their contents, but on the present state of affairs,
and on the measures proper to be taken for the fecu-
rity of the Republic. He exhorted the Senators to
speak their minds freely; telling them, that, if they
cooled, he knew what he had to do; and doubted
not but he could find means to make his peace with
Caesar.

He spoke the truth. Ca:far would have been well-
pleased to have gained him over; and prosecuted so
obstinately his follicitations and offers, that afterwards,
when war had been declared, and the armies were in
fight of one another in Epirus, Balbus still negotiated
by Cafar's order with Lentulus, and went on that ac-
count into Pompey's camp at the hazard of his liberty
and life. Lentulus was not averse to listening to Cae- Veil. I. 5.
far's promises. His ruined fortune, and heavy debts,
were powerful incentives thereto. But he thought
victory could not forsake Pompey; and that those on
his fide had the more certain prospect of riches and
promotion. For this reason he was always untra&able;
and Cfar names him as having contributed more
itan any one to the rupture. Metellus Scipio, Pom-
pey's father-in-law, necessarily followed his steps.
Cato would not hear of compromising the interest and
dignity of the Republic. Thus, notwithstanding
fcme cooler opinions, which tended at least to tempo-
rizing, it passed by a majority of voices, That Ce:-
far flould be ordered to ditband his army before a
certain day then fixed; and that, in cafe of dfobe-
dience, he should be declared an enemy to the Re-
public."

Anthony and Q Cassius oppose this decree. Upon
this the quarrel recommences. The Consul proposes
to deliberate on the method to- be taken to bring to
reason the opposing Tribunes. The severest refolu-
tions pass against them. The Tribunes intrench them-
sl&ves in the inviolable right of their office. At last

C 4 night

A.R. 73- night parts the combatants. The contest was renewed

+9. tlhe fol owing days, and continued until the seventh

of January. Daring this time Pifo the Censor, fa-
ther-in-lav to Cafar, and L. Roscius the Prator, who
had served under Caifar in Gaul, offered to go to him,
and inform him of the Senate's disposition. Their
proffer was rejected; the Tribunes were extremely
threatened ; and the Senate had recourse to that de-
cree which was never used but in the greatest extre-
niies. It was therein said, " that the Consuls, the
Prstrors, the Tribunes of the People, and the Pro-
consuls that were near Rome (which took in Pompey
and Cicero) were ordered to be careful of the safety
of the Republic." After this, Anthony and Cassius
had every thing to fear. They therefore fled by
night, diuifed as slaves, in an hired carriagei nor
flopped until they got to Rhemi. Curio and Calius
followed them. he Governors of the provinces were
then appointed, hi ch had been hindered above a year
by te opposition of the Tribunes. Cefar had two
ficcefrors crien him, L. Domitius Ahenobarbus for
Tranfapine Gaul, and M. Confidius for the Cisalpine.
?.Ieteluls Scipio hd the Government of Syria ; which
B3ibuis quitted. Of the refl I fiall speak, as occasion
oiTcrs.

Cziar's enemies, by putting the Tribunes in dan-
cer, ave him the pretext he had long waited for.
-He was then at Ravenna, the last town in his pro-
vince; and he was no sooner informed of what had
ha-pened at Rome, but he affcmbled what soldiers he
h.ad abou: him, which were thcfe of the thirteenth le-
,:cn In the harangue he rnade them, he insisted on
nothing f much as the violation of the Tribunitial
Frih; in the perfonr of Anthony and Cafflus. He
co.::pl: n.!, as he himielf relates, of the new prece-
dent in:rcduced inro the Commonwealth by those who
chec d and hlindered by the terror of arms the oppo-
fit.on of the Tribunes. He added, that Sylla, who
r. :ie his .l:iTiefs to humble, and had aimoft anni-
Ji:.t,, h.- Tribunehip, had yet left it the liberty of

oppo-

opposition; but that Pompey, who valued himfelf^eA.R.-
for having restored to that office all its prerogatives, AD C
deprived it now of that privilege, which it had always
enjoyed.

It is, therefore, with great reason that Cicero makes
Anthony responsible for all the calamities of the civil
war. He fays to be sure too much, as Plutarch ob-
serves, when he accuses * him of having been the cause
of that unfortunate war, as much as Helen was of the
Trojan. But it is ftri&ly true, that Anthony fur-
nifhed Caesar with the molt plausible pretext he could
wish, and the mot likely to impose on the People:
a necessary pretext, without which perhaps Caesar
might have found it difficult to have come to extremi-
ties, or at least to have secured the assistance of all his
troops.

He certainly apprehended great difficulty in per-
fuading them to follow him; since as Suetonius re- Suet. Cat
lates, when he harangued them the next day at Ri- ' 3.
mini, he used the molt fubmiflive intreaties, had re-
course to tears, tore his cloaths before, to hew his
great concern, and the extreme danger he was ex-
posed to. Cefar fays nothing like this in his relation
of what passed at Ravenna, and entirely omits his
harangue at Rimini. But it is certain that he sup-
presses many things; and the passage of the Rubi-
con, o famous with all other historians, is not men-
tioned in his Commentaries.

When he had done speaking to the legion assembled
by his orders at Ravenna, the officers and soldiers
cried out, that they were determined to maintain the
honour of their General, and to revenge the wrongs
done to the Tribunes. He accepted their offers; and,
with five thousand foot and three hundred horse, un-
dertook (according to an expression of Livy, which
Orofius has preserved) to attack the Universe. His
maxim and constant pracice, as we know, was to

* Ut Helena Trojanis, sic ifte huic reipublicae, caufa belli; caufi
peftis, atque exitii, filit. Cic. Phil. II. . 55.

place

A . 3. place his chief hopes of success in expedition; and he
Am' c was conviaced, that, on this occasion, it would be

easier for him to intimidate with a small force, by ap-
pearing when he was least expected; than to conquer,
by faying the time necessary for great preparations.
Contenting himself therefore with writing to his Lieu-
tenant-generals in Gaul to bring up the legions left
there, he determined to commence the war by the fur-
prize of Rimini, which was the first city of Italy in
the way from his province. In order to succeed, fe-
crecy was necessary. Wherefore he sent away, with-
out noiie, his ten cohorts under the Command of
Hortenfius's son. As for himself, he staid in the town;
went to a public spectacle; examined the plan of a
gladiator's school, which he intended to build and
in the evening fat down to supper with much com-
pany But, when night was come, he stole away on
pretence of illness; went out of Ravenna, unper-
ceived; and, getting mules to put in his chaise from
the first mill, took a by-way in which he loft himself.
At day-break he procured a guide, by whose assistance
he overtook his cohorts near the Rubicon, a rivulet
that bounded his province; so that he could not pass
it without tranfgrefing the laws, and taking off the
mask.

Determined, though he was, and without doubt
the boldest of men; the idea of the evils he was go-
ing to bring on the world, and of the dangers to
which he was going to expose himself, struck him in
that critical moment so forcibly, as to intimidate him
in a manner, and for a while suspend his aivity.
He stopped fiort on the bank; and turning towards
his friends, among whom was the famous Afinius
Pollio, said to them: * " We may yet go back: but,
, if we pass over this little bridge, we put every
" thing to the decision of arms."

Suetonius relates a pretended omen that happened
at that instant. A man of extraordinary size and
* Etiam nunc regredi poffumus: quod si ponticulum tnierimus,
om.nia armis agenda erunt, SUET. Czt. 33.

shape

--s--2

iiX
i
i r

-1;
·-
;//XPIJ i/r':ig. I/q S· I LPI i;lYN·

hape appeared on a sudden, fitting in the neighbour- A..o.
ood, and playing on a rural flute. Not only he Ant
epherds, but foine of the soldiers ad trumpeters,
ot about him to hear his nfic. This man snatches
he trumpet from one near him, putM it to his mouth,
founds a charge, and pases to the ather fide of the
river. If the fat is true, it was perhaps of CWr~s
own cntrivance, in order to hearten his trops.
However that be, he immediately cried out, * "Let
" us go where the Geds, ard the injustice of our ene-
" mies call us. The die is call." It was thus he
made that decisive, dangerous, ftep; stifling all re-
fletions of its terrible consequences; f like a man,
fays Plutarch, who shuts his eyes, and muffles his head,
to avoid feeing the abyss, into which he is going to
precipitate himself,

Cefar, havinig pased the Rubicon, marthed di-
realy to Rimini, and made himself matterof it. There
he found the -wo Tribunes, Anthony and Cafflusi
and he took care to ihew them to his soldiers in the
servile habit they had been obliged to put on for their
security. This fight etemnely exasperated he fol-
diery, who made fresh priteftations to their General,
that they would folloWhi ti wherever he Ihould lead
them.

What Cfar foresaw fell out. When the furprize
of Rimini was known at Rome, it threw the whole
city into the greatest coifternation. This was not
proportioned to the reality of the evil, which indeed
was considerable. They e~peced every minute to
fee C2far at the gates of Rome, with his ten legions,
and crouds of Gaulsand Germans. Pompey himself
loft his presence of mind. He had more troops about
him than his rival. But he was so harra edand teazed
by the reproaches of every bdy, that he could not
preserve the tranquillity neceflaryon extraordinary oc-
* Eatur, quo dedrum oftenta, & iimicorum niquitas, vocat;
jaaa elt alca.
t 'am t i e rt» MIC taX«((L «) xytw *® uit,, If w
Aqitw4, x, *mtY u{^vap2iwe 1® Tn u. Plt T. Pomp.

cafions,

A-R. 7o. cafions, nor come to a resolution worthy of his cou-n
Ant. C.
A~.C rage and prudence. Every one complained of his

condut: that he should raise Caesar to such a height
of power as made him formidable to his Country; and
that, when he knew he was in no condition to make
head against him, he lould reje&t all means of accom-
modation. They demanded of him where the forces
were that he ought to have assembled. For, as they
thought Cafar had with him his ten legions, they
would have been glad that Pompey had at least as
many; and, as he had nothing like such a force, Fa-.
vonius (alluding insultingly to the speech that escaped
him some time before) advised him to stamp on the
ground and raise soldiers.

Pompey was, without doubt, much to blame on
this account. He had told the Senate, that he had
ten legions in readiness; but, when they were wanted,
nothing appeared any wife proportionable to his pro-
mise: so that being interrogated on this head by Vol-
catius Tullus, a Confularperfon, he answered in con-
fusion, that he had the two legions that came from
Gaul; and also about thirty thousand new levies, which
only wanted marshalling. Upon which Tullus cried
out, " You have deceived us, Pompey;" and pro-
posed fending Deputies to Ceifar.
t. Cato himself contributed to chagrin Pompey by an
Pcp. unseasonable refletion. For, when every body ad-

mired with what penetration and sagacity, that gene-
rous, and knowing, Republican had long foretold,
what they at last saw fulfilled: " Yes indeed, fays he,

if you had believed me, you would not be now re-
duced, either to fear one man; or to put all your
"hopes in one man." Cato indeed had always preached
the necessity of guarding againlt Caesar. And in par-
ticular, on occasion of a letter wrote by Cafar to the
Senate full of invecives against him after it had
been read, Cato spoke ; and, having easily refuted a
frivolous, ill-fupported, accusation, he recriminated
on Cafar, and unfolded all his proje&cs and his whole
:che-ne '.th as much exa&nes as if he had been his

confi-

confident and accomplice, not his enemy; concluding, A. R.o1.
that it was not the Germans, nor the Celta, but Ca- .
far, that they ought to fear, and guard against. It
was this reiterated advice that Cato now blamed Pom-
pey for not having attended to. " You have judged
· better than me, fays Pompey to him, concerning fu-
" turity: and I have followed too much the impulse of
" friendship." However, whatever aversion Cato had
to all authority and command that was contrary to
law; he did not, on this occasion, shew an ill-timed
inflexibility, but advised the investing Pompey with
the whole power of the State; faying, that such as
did great mischief could best remedy it. His advice
was followed; and a decree passed, importing, that
there was a " Tumult;" that is, that a civil war was
broke out; and that the city was in danger; and there-
fore, it was necessary that all the citizens hould take
up arms.

The firfl use Pompey made of the supreme autho-Cic. ad
rity which had been conferred on him, or rather con- Att. 7. '.
firmed to him, was to abandon Rome; and to order
all the Senators to leave it, and follow him, with ex-
press declaration, that he. should confider those who
staid behind as Cafar's partizans. This looked like a
desperate resolution. He endeavoured in vain to jus-
tify it by the example of Themifocles, who did the
fame at Athens on the approach of the Persian army.
In vain he laboured to eftablifll the maxim, that cer-
tain walls and houses do not constitute one's Country.
-These reasons would not pass. However, at the
fame time they condemned the condu&e of their Gene-
ral, they loved his person : and that day may be even
confidered as one of the mos glorious of Pompey's
life; since all the illucfrious persons at Rome went
out of it with him. Flight, and exile, in Pompey's
company was to them their Country; and Rome with-
out him, Cafar's Camp. I hall not describe here the
tumult and disorder of this flight, as it is easily con-
ceived. I shall take notice only of this singular cir-
cumftance, tha, while those who were in Reme fled

from

A.R. 703. from thence with precipitation, the -inhabitants of all

c. the neighbouring cities hafted thither with equal earn-

eftnefs, to get out of the way of Cefar: and in all
that part of Italy the roads were filled with an infinite
number of men and women, who impeded, and ran
againit one another, by a fort of flux and reflux.,

The Consuls went out of Rome, even before they
had performed the sacrifices and ceremonies of reli-
gion, which the duty of their office required; a thing
hat had never happened before. The Prators, the
Tribunes of the People (at least the major part of them)
the Consular persons, in a word, almost all the Sena-
tors, followed Pompey with such unanimity, that
some of Czfar's partizans were carried away by the
torrent: even Pifo, his father-in-law, went out of
Rome Yith the ref.
Cal. ad Thus all the majesty of the Republic was with Pom-
Cic. . .
d Fam. pey, but all its strength was with Caifar. I speak not
cp. ,i. merely of his legions. He had long been the patron
suet. caL of all who were guilty of crimes, or deeply in debt,
C'.7' and of all the debauched part of the youth. He as-

sifted those with his prote&ion and money, whose as-
fairs were not irrecoverable. He frankly told others,
whose wants and crimes were irremediable, that they
wanted a civil war. By these means he had secured a
vast number of creatures; all men fit for ation, bold,
and who depended absolutely on him. It is easy to
conceive what strength and support a party may have
from such a collection. * " Cfar's cause, fays Ci-
cero, has no assistance from justice; every other as-
fiftance and advantage it has."

+ Among so many Romans, some partizans of
Cafar, some of Pompey, it is difficult to find any
* Caulim solum illa caufa non habet: ceteris rebus abundat. Cc.
ad Att. vii. 3.

- Qnum alii ad Cafarem inclinarent, alii ad Pompeium; solus Cato
feit aliquas & Reipublicze partes. Si animo compleai volueris illius
imaginem temporis videbis illinc plebem, & omnem ereaum ad res
novas vulgum; hinc optimates, & equeftrem ordinem, quidquid erat
in civitate leti & fanai; duos in medio reliaos, Rempublicam & Ca-
toncm. SH, ep. 104%

parti-

artizans of the Republic: and perhaps she had no A. R. 3.
other than Cato. I borrow this reflection from Se- Ant ,.
neca, who proves .it sufficiently. " If you would,
fays he, have a faithful representation of those times;
you will fee on one fide the People, and all those the
bad state of whose affairs made a change of govern-
mnent necessary; on the other, the Nobles, the Equef-
trian order, all that was illustrious and refpe&able in
Rome; in the midst, Cato and the Republic, alone
and abandoned of all." For Cato was not in fa&
much more satisfied with Pompey than with Cmfar;
since, if he had determined to kill himself, hould the
last be the conqueror; he had also resolved to go into
exile, if the firit was vi&orious.

This discovers another defec in the famous verse
of Lucan, censured besides with reason for its im-
piety in putting in parallelism the approbation of the
Gods, and that of a man. t " The Gods, fays he,
approved of the Victor; but Cato of the Vanquished."
Cato was far from approving of the Vanquished;
only, reduced to so wretched an alternative, he
thought him the better of the two. For the reft,
every thing afflited and distressed him. His very
exterior was declarative of his grief. For, from the Plct. at.
day the war began to his death, he neither cut his
hair nor beard; nor ever wore a garland, as was -cuf-
tomary at their entertainments; in a word, he carried
on his person all the marks of deep mourning and ex-
treme afflition.

I shall not relate the pretended prodigies on the
approach of this cruel war, with which the antient
writers abound. I hall only observe, that the minds
of people being terrified, and therefore more dif-
posed to superstition, found presages even in the molt
common and natural events. Thus because PerpernaPlin.7.4.
died at this time, at the age of ninety-eight, beingva,- Max-
the last of all those who were Senators when he was Dio,3i. 4.
Consul, and leaving behind him only seven of those
1 Vi&rix caufa Deis placult, fed Vi&a Catoni.

whom

4^70-. whom thirty-feven years before (being Censor with
A, c Philip) he had put on the lift of Senators; they fan-

cied that his death, so circumstanced, foretold the
ruin of the Senate, and a change of government.

Pompey, when he left Rome, went towards Cam-
pania; designing to get into Apulia, where were the
two legions he had finessed from Caesar. He did not
confide much in these legions, fearing they had some
attachment left for their old General. His resource,
therefore, was to raise men all over Italy, and to en-
deavour to maintain himself there, if possible; or
else, in cafe of necessity, to cross the ea, that he
might get time enough to draw from the East a nu-
merous, well-affeted, army. For his reputation was
great in those parts, where he had performed many
signal exploits. But he tudioufly concealed the lat-
ter scheme, which would have discredited his arms,
and seemed to have no other design than to defend
Italy. Many subordinate Commanders were in pof-
session of its provinces, and enlisted every one they
could get. Cicero presided over the coast of Campa-
nia. But, desirous as he was of peace, he did not
enter warmly into military operations. His intention
was, to mediate between the two parties, as long as
there remained any hopes of an accommodation.
Lentulus Spinther, P. Attius Varus, Domitius Ahe-
nobarbus, and ome others, served their party with
more spirit; but not with more success, as we shall
soon have occasion to relate.

While Ca far was yet at Rimini, a young Gentle-
man of the fame family and name, and the Praetor
Roscius, came to him with offers of peace. Though
they were not formally deputed, yet Pompey had or-
dered them to make his compliments, and even in
some fort excuses, to Cfar. He told them, " that
he was not actuated by enmity to Cfar; but purely
by zeal for the Republic, whose interest he had ever
preferred to anyprivate engagement. That itwas worthy
of Cafar to act conformably to this maxim; and not
prejudice the Commonwealth, by puihing too far his

revenge

venge againt his private enemies." It is plain thatA.R. 7g.
ompey, by taking this ftep, had a mind to enter Ant. C
o a negotiation, not with an intention to make
ace, but doubtless to get time; as he had been fur-
ized, and found his levies were not so easily made as
e imagined.
Cafar, who was not more disposed to peace, had a
nd, however, to have the reputation of desiring it.
egave to young L. Cefar and Roscius new propo-
s, which he thus recounts himself: " Let Pompey
into Spain; let * all the armies be disbanded; let
ery body throughout Italy lay down their arms;
t every thing that participates of terror and force be
moved; let the ele6tions of Magistrates be made
ith perfet freedom; and let the Republic be ad-
iniftered by the authority of the Senate and People."
nd, in order to fettle the particulars of the execu-
in of these articles, he demanded an interview with
ompey.
Cicero further explains some of these articles. Ac-c. aa
ording to him, Cfar promised to resign TranfalpineFamn- 's
aul to Domitius, and Cisalpine Gaul to Confidius.1
e relinquished the privilege he had obtained of de-
anding the Consulship by proxy, and declared that
e would come and stand for it in person, according
o ftri&t form.
These proposals had an air of moderation, and Ci-
ero entertained hopes of their success. He thought
efar began to be aflamed of his violent procedure;
nd he knew Pompey was dissatisfied with the forces
e had about him. But there hopes soon vaniflied.
ompey insisted, as a preliminary, that Cefar hould
turn to his obedience, and quit Rimlni and the other
ofts he had seized on out of his province. For,
uring the negotiation, he had by no means difcon-
inued the war. Cfar, on the other fide, wanted
ompey and the Consuls to set a good example, by
* Caesar's text is " ipfi exercitus dimittantur " which is plainly
ulty I read " cqnti," inltad of ' ipfi." 7
VOL. IX. D suspend-

A.. 7o3. suspending the levies they were making, and difmif
Ant c sing the forces they had already assembled. Besides

though Pompey promised to go into Spain, he fixec
no time for his departure. And lastly, as to the in
terview desired by Cefar, he declined giving any an
fwer about it. Cfar therefore thought he had;
io right to discontinue the negotiation. He dispersed all

over Italy a fort of manifesto, wherein he gave moil
specious reasons for his conduct, and even challenged
Pompey, as one who broke his word, and was afraid
of an eclairciffement. It is doubtless, in this piece, thai
Suet. Cf. (with his usual address and care to make friends) he
C-7' declared, that he hould confider all those as hi!

friends, who did not at againit him. This policy wa
the better judged, as Pompey talked in the oppofitt
ftie, and protested, that he would treat as enemies
all those who were wanting to the cause of the Repub
lic,'whofe defender he was.
Cic. ad Labienus had raised his spirits by coming over te
Att. 7.9. his fide, while the accommodation was on foot. He

was, as we have seen, the most famous of Cfar's
Lieutenants, and him for whom that General had the
greatest eteem, and most confided in. Pompey's
party boasted much of thejuftice of their cause, which
had procured them such a deserter, and reckoned
much on his skill. But he brought them scarce any
thing besides vain hopes, occasioned by his undervalu-
ing in his discourse the forces of Cfar. As for the
reft, he was of little real service to them. * Labienus
had seemed an excellent Officer, while he acted undei
Casfar; from the time he left him, he performed no-
thing equal to the reputation he had acquired. Cafar
behaved to him with his wonted generosity, and fenl
after him his money and baggage.

Mean while, he carried on the war vigorously;
and, though he had yet only the thirteenth legion
with him, he made himself master of Pesaro, Fano,

* -- Soris in armis
Cai'arrei Labienus ciat, nunc transfuga vilis.

LUCAN. V. 345'

An.

Ancona, and Arezzo in Tuscany. At the fame tme A. R. 73.
he raised forces all over Picenum, and scouted every Ant
where Pompey's partizans. I hiall not enter into the
particulars of his less iirportant expeditions. I shall
content myself with faying, that without drawing the
sword, he compelled Thermus, who was then Praetor,
to give up to him Iguviun ; Attius Varus, Oimo; Eugubiat
and Lentulus Spinther, Ascoli, But he was obliged
to lay siege to Corfinium; into which Domitius Ahe-
nobarbus hid thrown himself, with many illustrious
perforis arid a good number of troops.

This was a good capture for Cfar, and he was
obliged for it to the ralhnefs of Domitius; who find-
ing himself at the head of thirty cotiorts, would needs
at the mari of importance. Pompey had wrote to
him, to come and join him in Apulia; representing,
that they had no chance to dispute Italy but by the
junftion of all their forces; and that, if he kept fepa-
rate, he would be infallibly ruined. This was good
advice; but ubordination and obedience are rare in
civil wars. Domitius undertook to make head against
Cefar, and hinder his advancing. He had even
thoughts of going into Gaul, the Government of which
country had beeh gien
i him by the Senate. But Ce-
far allowed him no time. He marched against him;
and,at the first rencounter, his advanced parties routed
five of Domitius's cohorts, who were breaking down
a bridge about three miles off Corfinium : after which
he fat down with two legions before a town, whole
garrison was more numerous than his army. It is
true, that more of his troops soon came up; which
enabled him to form a second camp on the other fide
of the town, under the command of Curio.

When Domitius saw himself besieged, he was very
sensible of his danger. He wrote immediately to Ponl-
pey; desiring him to come to his assistance, and not
leave, to the mercy of Cfar, thirty cohorts, and a
great number of Senators and Roman Knights. While
he waited for Pompey's answer, he made preparations

D 2 for

A.R. 703. for a vigorous defence, and endeavoured to encourage
Ant C. his troops by magnificentpromifes.

9' This was a most untoward affair for Pompey. To

abandon so great a body of troops, and so many per.
sons of diftinftion, would be a great loss and discredit
to his party. On the other fide, his army was weak;
except the two legions we have mentioned several
times, and on whose fidelity he could not depend, he
had nothing but new-raifed troops about him. To
rifque an engagement with such, against Cwfar's vete.
rans, was to expose himself to immediate and irretrie.
vable ruin. He came therefore to a resolution becom.
ing a man of sense and skill; and though he knew his
condu&t was condemned as timid, as appears by Cice-
ro's letters (who I think in that has done him justice)
he answered Domitius, that it was his business to ex-
tricate himself as well as he could out of the difficulties
he had brought on himself, and that he ought to en-
deavour at all events to join him.

Domitius, inclosed in Cafar's lines, was no longer
able to execute what Pompey advised. His courage
and haughtiness immediately left him, and he deter-
mined to save himself by flight. He put, however,
as good a face on the matter as he could, and pro-
mifed his troops peedy assistance from Pompey; ex-
horting them to make a vigorous defence, and hold
out until he could come up. But his trouble and con-
fusion belied his words; besides, he was observed to
hold frequently little councils of his friends and inti
mates ob that the truth transpired, and the troops
learnt that they were not to expet any succour, and
that their Commander was about to leave them and
make off. Upon which they resolved to consult also
their safety, and fend a deputation to Cafar. The
burgesses at first opposed this, not knowing the true
state of affairs; but in a short time thty came to a
good understanding with the garrison, and jointly fe-
cured the peron of Domitius; fending word to Caesar,
that they were ready to open their gates, receive his

orders,

orders, and deliver up Domitius alive. Cafar gladly A.R. 703
accepted of the offer; but, as it was near night, he d;-'
would not take poffeflion of the town immediately,
left it hould be plundered in the dark by his soldiers.
He therefore ordered his troops to keep a tri& watch
round the city, and prevent a single person from
escaping. Cfar observes, that this was performed
with the utmost care and vigilance; and that his whole
camp was in great expectation of his determination as
to the fate of the burgesses, and illultrious perforn
shut up in the town.

Lentulus Spinther was one of there; who, having
been drove out of Afeoli, as I have mentioned, had
fought helter in Corfinium. More unfortunate in
this place than in the first, he resolved to essay the
clemency of the Vitor. Accordingly, about the
fourth watch of the night, he called from the wall to
the guard, and desired to be conducted to Cfar.
He was carried to him under a good escort, not of
Cafar's soldiers, but of those of Domitius; who were
so fearful of the reproach of having broke their agree-
ment, that they attended him until delivered into
Caesar's hands. Lentulus was not miflaken in the
opinion he had entertained of his enemy's generosity.
He had scarce began to implore his mercy, when Cae-
r interrupted him by faying, " that he was not come
ut of the bounds of his province with an intent to
njure any body; but to repel the injuries done him
yhis enemies, to revenge the wrongs of the Tri-
unes, and to restore to the Roman People, who were
pressed by a fnall faction of the Nobles, their li-
erty and privileges." When Lentulus found him-
ls out of danger, he alied leave to return into the
own, " where some, he said, were so terrified, that they
ad took desperate resolutions." He meant Domitius,
hose adventure is very singular.
We have seen Domitius ating for several years as
declared enemy to Cefar. He had laboured to his
tmoft to get him recalled, and had lately obtained
s Government from the Senate. Measuring there-

D 3 fore

A^R.70. fore Cafar's hatred for him by his own for Cefar,
Ant.C. when he found he flhould fall into his hands, he ex.

peaed no quarter; and, bold through desperation,
determined to kill himself, that he might not be killed
bv his enemy. He accordingly ordered his Plyfician,
who was one of his slaves, to give him a dose of poi.
son, which he drank courageously, and threw himsel
on a bed. Some hours after, Lentulus arrives, and
gives him an account of Cefar's clemency. Domiti
now deplores his desperate situation, and accuses him.
self of blindness and precipitation. His Phyfici
comforts him: " Be of good cheer," fays he, "1
" have given you a soporific, and no poison: it wi
·' do you no manner of hurt." Domitius, upon thi
takes heart, and waits patiently for the time of his ap
pearance before Cxfar.

At day-break Cafar ordered before him all the Se.
nators, Senators sons, military Tribunes, and Roman
Knights. Besides Lentulus and Domitius, who werl
Consular persons, there were in the town three other
Senators, one of whom was then Questor; also po.
mitius's son, and many young men of quality;
great number of Roman Knights, and some Decu.
rions, or Senators of the neighbouring municilp
towns, who had been rent for by Domitius. Cf
gave orders to secure them from the iults of the
soldiery; and, after reproaching them with thei
animosity to him, which he pretended he had not de-
served, he let them all at liberty, without so much a
requiring any fort of promise from them. He di
more. Domitius had brought to Corfinium * fix mil
lions of Sefferces, which had been given lim by
Pompey, to pay his forces with. This therefore wa
public money; and Cafar might very well have too
it. He returned it however to Domitius; - bein
willing, as he himself fays, to flew himself generous,

* Forty-fix thousand eight hundred and feventy-five pounds, fr
i!ng.

t' Ne continentior in vita hominum, quam in pecunia fuifle vi
,:ea ir. Cei. de B. Civ. 1. I. n. 3.

- M~~~~~~~~~~~a

as well as merciful. As to Domitius's troops, he A. R. oi.
took them into pay, and, soon after, sent them into Ant c.
Sicily.

Such was the plan of condut, that Caesar prescribed
himself, on this first occasion, and which he pretty
nearly adhered to, on every other: a conduct laudable
on all accounts; on account of his clemency to the
Commanders, so unusual in civil wars; on account
of the great advantage it gave him of augmenting his
forces, after every victory, by gaining to his party
the vanquished soldiers; and on account of the honour
that his generosity conferred on his arms and cause,
whose injustice it, to this day, covers, in the eyes of
many.

Caxfar rejoices himself on this account, in a letter
to Balbus and Oppius, two of his friends; but he
discovers, at the fame time, the interested, ambitious,
motive of his clemency. " * I am glad, fays he,
that you approve of my behaviour at Corfinium.-
Let us endeavour to regain, ifpoffible, by such means,
the affe&ion of every body; and procure a long en-
joyment of the fruits of victory. For the others, by
their cruelty, made themselves odious, and reaped
little benefit from their conquest; Sylla excepted,
whom I am resolved not to imitate. Let us set the
example of a new method of conquering, and insure
our fortune by clemency and generosity." This letter
manifests Cafar's fettled determination at that time to
seize on the Sovereignty, and keep poffefllon of it:
from whence it follows, that all his negotiations about
peace were insincere, or only aimed at bringing Pom-
pey to submit to him, with the reft of his country-
men; which was scarce to be expeced.

Gaudeo mehercule vos fignificare literis, quam valde probetis ea
que apud Corfinium gefta unt... Tentemus hoc modo, si poffumus,
omnium voluntates recuperare, & diuturna victoria uti: quoniam
reliqui crudelitate odium effugere non potuerunt, neque viltoriam
diutlus tenere, prnter unum L. Sylam, quem imitaturus non fum.n
Htc nova fit ratio vincendi, ut mifericordia & liberalitate nos munia,
mus. p. CES. apud Cic. ad Att, 1. ix.

D 4 Domi-

.-R-7os. Domitius and Lentulus, when they left Cfar'i
Ant. C. camp, went to hide their disgrace in their country.
Cic ad houses; where they hut themselves up some time,
At . ix. giving way to their melancholy reflecions. Lentulus

even laid, that he had done enough for Pompey;
and that he thought himself obliged to give proofs of
his gratitude to Czfar. However, we shall oon fee
them both re-appear on Pompey's fide, and diftinguilh
themselves by their inveteracy against him to whom
they owed their lives. It would not be furprizing to
find Cfar inclined to punish such ingratitude: But
his haughty, generous foul was above such thoughts;
he explains himself, on this subject, in the noblest
manner, in a letter to Cicero. * " It is no reason,
fays he, that I hould repent of my clemency, because
I am informed, that those I set at liberty at Corfinium
are gone to war against me again. I am. rather
pleased to find them all of a piece, as it becomes me
also to be."

Cafar was detained but even days before Corfi-
nium; and,'as soon as he had brought that impor-
tant affair to a conclusion, he decamped; and, tho'
the morning was far advanced, he made a whole day's
march. He went in pursuit of Pompey, who had
no other resource but to retire into Brundisium.
Though he was much nearer that town than his enemy,
yet Cicero was afraid that Cefar would get there
first. t " This man, fays he, in a fright, is a mon-
fter, for activity, vigilance, and dispatch." Pompey,
howeer, had time to throw himself into Brundisium
with what forces he had been able to save and as-
femble. These were not considerable, though he had
not refuf d any fort of succours; and had even
armed, if v.e may believe Cafar, the hepherds and
fiaves. Cafar came before the town on the eighth of
* Meum fa&um probari a te triumpho gaudeo. Neque illud me
movet, quod ii qui a me dimifi funt difcefliffe dicuntur, ut nihi
ruifus e;um inferrent. Nibil enim malo, quam & me ei fimilem
effe, & iks iui. Ep. Cxs. ad Cic. 1. ix. ad Att.
+ Scc -s horribili vigilantia, celeritate, diligentia eft. Cic. ad
Att. vii. .,

March,

March, with fix legions; four of which were oldA R. 03.
troops, and two new-raifed. It was no small work, At*.
surely, to have mattered all Italy, one city excepted,
since the eighth or ninth of January.

On his march, he made prisoner Cn. Magius,Ep Cef.
Pompey's t chief Engineer; and, according to cuf- apud Ci

ad Att.
tom, immediately gave him his liberty, and sent him . ix
to his General; charging him to ask and press for an
interview, as a sure means to fettle every thing. He
fays, in his Commentaries, that Magius brought him
back no answer from Pompey. But we have a letter
from Caesar to Oppius and Balbus, which proves the
contrary. " Pompey, fays he, has sent Magius to
me, with overtures of peace; and I have answered
him what I thought proper." It is difficult to recon-
cile these contraditions but by supposing that Cafar
has not been scrupulously faithful, as to facts, in his
Commentaries, particularly in what regards the civil
war. Afinius Pollio, who accompanied him in several
expeditions, expressly accused him of it, as Sueto- Suet. C.
nius relates. So that this great man, this generous, c. 56.
elevated foul, disdained not to dishonour himself by
falihood, and to suppress the truth, in a work de-
ftined for posterity: such are the fruits of ambition !

Pompey had no sooner got into Brundiuflm, but
he dispatched from thence Metellus Scipio to his Go-
vernment of Syria, and, with him, his eldest son,
Cn. Pompeius; ordering them both to assemble, from
all parts of the East, powerful forces, by land and
lea. He persuaded also the Consuls to go over to
Dyrrachium, in Epirus, with thirty cohorts; andDurzo
prepared to follow them. He was suspicious of them
both, but particularly of Lentulus, whom Caesar, by
Balbus, continually follicited; making him the greatet Dio. Bal-
promises, if he would return to Rome. The depar- bus adic.
ture of the Consuls broke Caesar's measures, in this 1.8 adAtt
respect, and Caninius Rebilus, one of his Lieutenants,
t I venture to translate thus, " Pr2fe&us fabrntn," which lite-
rally signifies " Commander of the workmen" who follow an army.
D'Ablancourt calls him, " Intendant des machines."

8 being

A.R. -. being ordered by him to enter into a negotiation with
A*t.c Scribonius Libo, father-in-law to Sextus, Pompey's

youngest son, was answered, That it was impofible
to treat with him, in the absence of the Consuls.

Cafar therefore thought of nothing now but hut-
ting up Pompey in Brundisium; and, while he be.
fieged the town by land, he endeavoured to conftrut
a mole and ftaccado to block up the port. They fought
vigorously on both fides about there works for nine
days; when, the vessels that had transported the
Consuls being returned before Cfar's works were
compleated, Pompey got every thing ready for the
embarkation of the twenty cohorts he had with him.

But, fearing that Cafar would enter the town, and
attack him, while he was embarking, he walled up
the gates, barricaded the streets, or cut ditches across
them, filled with pointed flakes, covered with hur-
dles and earth; and fortified, with a double pallifado
of very firong, well-fharpened flakes, the two streets
left open to get at the port. When all was in readi-
ness, while the soldiers embarked, he placed on the
walls and towers ome archers and lingers, who were
to retire, at a certain ignal, to embark on some small
vessels that waited for them, and join the fleet.

He had sorbad the inhabitants of Brundisium,
whom he mistrusted, to stir out of their houses. They
found means, however, to advertise Cefar of Pom-
pey's departure. Immediately the fcaling-ladders are
applied to the walls, and Caesar enters the town. His
soldiers had like to have fallen into the snares and
ditches provided for them by the enemy. But the
townlinen acquainted them with their danger; to
avoid which, they were obliged to take a great circuit,
which gave Pompey time enough to put to sea. Two
transports only, impeded by Cxfar's mole, were taken,
with the troops on board.

Thus fled Pompey from that port, where he landed
a few years before, with o much glory, at the head
of a vicorious army, laden with the spoils of the
Ea.st He £ct out by abandoning to his rival the ca-

pital

pital of the Empire; he now abandoned to him allA.R-703,
Italy: a timid condut, had it been possible to have Ant. c
done otherwise; but a prudent one, if there was no
other way to get time to strengthen his hands. Plu-
tarch affirms, that many thought the scheme he form-
ed at this conjunture, and the manner in which he
executed it, one of his most glorious military exploits:
and, whoever confiders what advantage and superiority
Caesar had then over him, will easily (I imagine) come
into the fame opinion. No one, probably, would
have dissented, had Pompey been victorious at Phar-
falia.

His fault was, his not being prepared againif the
attack, and his having put his enemy on defperatc
terms, before he could make head against him. True
it is, that Cafar's situation was much more conveni-
ent than his, for commencing the war. Cafar's pro-
vince was contiguous to Italy; it was but a little way
from the Rubicon to Rome; whereas the legions
Pompey had in Spain could not get at him, but by
crofing the southern part of Gaul, of which Cafar
was in poffeflion. Whence it happened, that Pompey
made no other use of the excellent troops under his
Command, than to get time to raise ochers.

Cafar would willingly have followed Pompey into
Greece, and taken advantage of his confusion and
weakness, to finilh the war at a blow. But he had
no hips; and was also apprehensive, that, while he
was beyond ea, Afranius and Petreius, Pompey's
Lieutenants in Spain, might fall onGaul, and, per-
haps, on Italy itself, with their five legions. He de-
termined therefore to begin by securing them; and
* to go first into Spain, as he fays, to fight an army,
without a General; and afterwards to go against a
General, without an army. But first he took the
necessary precautions to secure, during his absence,
the coasts and environs of Italy. He ordered the Ma-

Ire fe ad exercitum fine duce, & inde reverfurum ad ducem fine
exercitu. SUET. Cas F. 3f.

giflrates

A· R. 703. giftrates of those municipal towns that were ea-ports,
Ant. C. to assemble all the vessels they could, and fend them

49.

to Brundisium. He sent Valerius, one of his Lieute-
nants, into Sardinia, and Curio into Sicily, tofubdue
thefi two islands, from whence Rome drew her chief
fubflftence. Curio had also orders to pass over into
Africa, when he had mattered Sicily. As for himself,
he thought it necessary to appear at Rome.

Valerius had but one legion; but that was more
than he wanted, to execute his commifion. On the
first rumour of his approach, the inhabitants of Cag-
liari drove out of their city Cotta, who governed the
island for the Senate and Pompey. All the other ci-
ties of Sardinia were of the fame mind: So that Cotta
was forced to abandon his province, and retire into
Africa; and Valerius had nothing to do, but to take
possession of the vacant post.
ftut. Cat. Cato was Governor of Sicily, and aced with his
A3.1" usual vigi an d diligence. He refitted the old

ships; he built new; he raied forces, not only all
over his island, but also in Lucania, and the country
of the Bruttii. When all thele preparations were in
great forwardness, he was informed that Afinius Pollio
was come to Messina. He had been ent there by
Curio, who was hastening to follow him, with three
legions. Cato, who was at Syracuse, dispatched an
express to Pollio, to demand by whose order, and by
what title, he entered in arms into his province. Pol-
iio returned for answer, that he did it by the order
cf him who was Matter of Italy. This was the best
account he could give. For nothing could be more
irregular thrn a commission granted by aProconful of
Gaul, to diipoffefs him, whom the Senate had ap-
pointed Governor of Sicily. Pollio also informed
Cato's mefienger of what had passed in Italy, with
refpet to Pompey's flight; and added, that Curio
was to follow him. Cato, who abhorred civil wars;
and who, besides, though he knew he was strong
enough to drive Pollio out of Sicily, did not think
_hnr.felf in a condition to make head against Curio;

afiem-

assembled the inhabitants of Syracuse, and told them, A R 703.
that, as being unable to defend the island, he would , '.
not make it the theatre of war to no purpose; that
he had therefore resolved to retire; and that the best
thing they could do was to submit to the Conqueror.

This manner of thinking and acting was un-
doubtedly very humane and laudable. I wish Cato
had not thereto joined some difrefpe&ful complaints
against Providence; which, he said, had given Pom-
pey success in a thousand unjust projets; and now,
that he defended a just cause and the public liberty,
deserted him. But triumphant injustice, and unfor-
tunate virtue, are inconsistencies which nothing but
the revelation of future rewards and punilhments can
reconcile.

If we believe Cafar, Cato reproached Pompey alfb
with having provoked a war he was in no condition
to sustain. These refletions might as well have been
omitted: But is the fact certain ? Cfar hated Cato;
and was, perhaps, glad to put him in a ridiculous
light. Cato went from Sicily into the island of Corcyra,
and from thence into Pompey's camp.

Cafar, in his return from Brundisium to Rone,
saw Cicero; who being, according to custom, irre-
solute, through feeing too much, had not yet chose his
party. It is really curious to follow, and study, the
flux and reflux of the contrary sentiments, which, by
turns, agitated this great and sublime genius, without
other effect than tormenting him; and without his
being able to come to a final conclusion. To lay be-
fore the reader all that is interesting in this matter, it
would be necessary to transcribe three books of his let-
ters to Atticus. But I shall confine myself to what is ic." ad'

Att. vii.
moit important. 9.

He left his Government of Cilicia, as I have al-
ready observed, exatly at the time that the difference
between Cafar and Pompey waxed warm, and threat-
ened an approaching rupture. He was immediately
struck, not only with the unhappy consequences of
flch a division, with r-epet to the Republic in gene-

ral,

A R. 3. ral, but also with the personal difficulties it would lay
Ant. . him under, in particular. He thought he had been

very polite in keeping on good terms with both of
them. This was, to him, reconciling his duty and in-
terest. Their authority sufficiently secured him from
all danger; and he was not afraid of being drawn into
any bad measures, either by Pompey, who conformed
then to the best maxims; or by Caesar, who was then
in friendhip with Pompey.

Nothing could have been better contrived, if the
friendship of two ambitious men could have been
lasting. Cicero was deceived in that particular; and
he saw the time was come, when he was to declare for
one, against the other. They had both wrote to him;
and they both told him, that they relied on his friend-
ihip; though Cxefar, at the bottom, mistrusted him a
little. This threw Cicero into great perplexity. His
choice was fixed, if they came to blows. *" In that
cafe, fays he to Atticus, I had rather be conquered
with Pompey, than be victorious with Cefar." But
things were not yet come to that. It was, at first,
only a dispute within the Senate, or, at least, within
Rome. An accommodation was possible; and Cicero
was unwilling to make Cfar his enemy, while he
could avoid it, by a premature declaration. It would
have been even indecent, in him, for a private reason:
For he was atually in Cefar's debt. But he resolved
c,. ad to free himself from that tye, by paying him, and ap-
Ar& tii. plying to that use the money he had set apart for his

triumph.

For he had pretensions to a triumph, as I have
elsewhere said; and those very pretensions offered him
tome relief in his perplexity; which he did not neg-
lect. It was natural for him to covet that honour,
the object of the wishes of all those who had com-
manded an army. And, as the prosecution of his
claim obliged him to keep out of Rome, he had a
1 Si caftr.s res geretur, video cum altero vinci fatius effe, quam
cum aitero inctrc. Cic. ad .rt. v;:. .

7 law-

lawful excuse for not appearing in the Senate. Pom- rA. R. 7
pey himself was willing he ihould avoid displeasing, A~ C
by a needless declaration, some Tribune, who might
oppoie his triumph. So that all the Contests about
Cifar, between the Consuls and Senate, on one fide,
and the Tribunes, Curio and Anthony, on the other,
passed over without Cicero's being any-wise concerned
therein. He thus reserved to himself the part of peace-
maker; a glorious part, suitable to his chara&er, ta-
lents, and situation; and in which he had done well
to have persevered to the last. But his heart and en-
gagements were for Pompey. Him he exhorted in
private to peace; resolved nevertheless to follow him,
if he chose war.

Not that he had a good opinion of Pompey's inten-
tions. " Vi&tory, fays he, will certainly give us
a Tyrant. Neither the one, nor the other, aims at
our good and advantage. They both want to reign.
What an unhappy situation are we in, with refpe to
the war we are entering upon ! We expect to be pro.
fcribed, if we are conquered; and to be slaves, if we
are victorious. Pompey has always wilhed for such
a power as Sylla had. He does not so much as con-
ceal it. He commonly fays, What Sylla could do,
why should not I be able to do ? His heart and tongue
approve Sylla and his proscriptions."

But if Cicero was dissatisfied with Pompey, and
apprehensive of the consequences of the victory; he
detested Caesar, and abhorred his cause. He thought
his demands impudent, he confidered him as a pro-
fligate robber, and, when Cafar had commenced hof-
tilities by taking Rimini and some other towns, Cicero
thus expresses his indignation: " O wretched mad-
man, cries he, who has not the least notion of true

Ex vi&oria tyrannus existet. Neutri exa- eft ille, ut nos beati
fimus: uterque regnare vuit. Depugrua,-ut quid ? Si vi&us eris pro-
fcribare; si viceris, tamen lirvias. Mirandmn in modun Cnaeus nofter
Sullani regni imilitudilerr. concupivit, fi/rJc rVi aw. Nihil ille un-
quam minus obscure tulit. Quam crebro illud ? Sulla potuit, ego non
potcro ? Sullaturit animus ejus & prolcripturit. Cc. ad Att. vii 5.
rilil, . ii. . ix. 7. & o0.

glory !

AR. ,. glory ! * And yet all that he does, he pretends to do
Ant. C. in defence of his honour. Where then is honour but

9' in the practice of virtue ? And can virtue and his

duty permit him to keep up an army without any
authority from the publick; to seize on the towns of
his fellow-citizens, in order to open himself a way to
the deftrution of his Country; to project the fpung-
ing of debts, the recalling of the banished, and-a
thousand other outrages; that by these means he may
attain to Despotism, the great divinity of the ambi-
tious ? Let him keep his fortune to himself. As for
me, I look on a walk with you at your country-seat
as a greater good, than all such tyrannies; or rather,
I would die a thousand deaths before I would harbour
such a thought. But, fay you, if you had a mind to
be a tyrant, you have not the means. I own it. But
every body is able to will and desire a thing. Now
it is this very will that I confider as something more
miSerable than crucifixion. There is but one de-
gree of misery beyond this; and that is to succeed in
so unjust a desire." Can there be any thing more
forcible than 'this inve&ive; any thing more noble
than these sentiments ?

If to this we add, that Cicero thought, at the be-
ginning of the war, that Cafar's vicory would be
cruel; that he would shed blood like Cinna; that he
would confiscate and plunder like Sylla; in a word,
that he would be a second Phalaris; we may conceive
what aversion our Orator had for Pompey's arrival:
and if, on the other fide, we recollect his opinion of

* O hominem amentem & miferum, qui ne umbram quidem r« xA«
viderit ! Atque hec ait omnia fe facere dignitatis caufa. Ubi eft au-
tem dignitas, nifi ubi honeftas? Num honeftum igitur habere exerci-
tum nullo publico confilio; occupare urbes civiun, quo facilior fit
aditus ad patriam ; X(--:' ,.r. a, yS.J'w xa&sr-c. fexcenta aliafcelera
moliri; n Stan H, oa-r ixTU TrStvJ' : Sibi habeat fuam fortunam.
Unam mehercule tcum apricationem in illo Lucretino solo malm,
quam omnia iftius modi regna i vel potius mori millies, quam femel
ifus modi quidquam cogitare. (Qid si tu veiis inquis Age, quis
eft, cui velle non liceat ? Sed ego hoc ipfum velle miferius duce, quam
in crucem tolli. Una res eft ea miferior, adipilci quod ira volueris.
Cc. ad Att. vii. ix.

Pompey;

ompey we hall not be furprized at his .writing to A. R..Iot.
is friend, * " I know whoi I ouht to fly; .but I Ant C
ow not whopm I ought to follow." 9
However, his inclination, as I have .oeferved, was
oPompey. It was not only gratitude for being re-
alled from exile; it was love, it was tenderness.
e often indeed blames the condut, and feps, of
hat General in his letters to Atticus ; but it is always
With bitter grief, with infinite regret. After Cgfar
ad hewn his clemency to the prisoners at Corfiniun,
vhich redopnded so rpuch to his honour, and by com-
arifon to Pompey's hame; Cicero is afflicted at the
arallel. t '" Is it not, fays he, a most lamentable
hing, that he, whose cause is detestable, should gain
pplaufe; and that the defender of the good cause
ould deserve blame and reproach ? That the first
hould be the preserver of his enemies, and the other
the deserter of his friends ?" He adds some more
refletions. of the fame fort; then flopping short, Let
us conclude, lfys he, for I increase my afflition by
refleing who aufes it."

This tenderness is renewed at every untoward acci-
dent, at every danger, that threatened Pompey. $ (t O
grief, cries he, we are told that Cfar is in pursuit of
'ompey. Cafar pursues Pompey! With what inten-
tion, good Gods! To kill him ? Ah wretched me !
And we do not all of us go and throw our bodies as
a rampart before him! Your affli&ion, doubtless,
equals mine, my Atticus. But what can we do ?
We are conquered, oppressed, and reduced to perfect
impotence."
* Quem fugiam,h.abeoj qum fequar, non habeo. Cic. ad Att.
nii. 7.
t Qid hoc miferius, uam alterum plaufus in foediffima caufa quae-
rere,alterum offenfiones n optima ? alterum exiftimari conservatorem,
inimicorum, alterum defertorem micorum ?- Sed hec omittamtls
augemus enim dolorern retrgtando. .Cic. d Att. viii. 9.
t Pompeium, o rem acerbam! p ,erfequi Cfar dicitur. Perfequi
C;far Pompeium ! quid! t,ititerficiat ? . me miferum ! Et non on-
nes corpora noftra oppoiinmus! In quo tu quoque ingemifcis. Sed
quid faciamus? ViAt, oppvlffi ~ti lae fumius. Cgc. ad Att.
VOL. X3. .It
VOL. IX. E It

R.- 73. It was no easy matter for Cicero to follow Pomp
^t c'. in his retreat; and he could not do it with a good.

will, as all his fleps displeased him. The abandoning
of Rome, the neglect of Corfinium, and, above all
the design of quitting Italy, disgusted him greatly.
And Pompey had took all these resolutions very myf.
terioufly, of his own head, without communicating
them to any body. Notwithstanding, when Cicero
knew he was besieged in Brundisium, and also when
he heard he was gone into Greece, he was in the utmost
despair. He reproached himself bitterly for not hay.
ing accompanied him every where; he thought him.
fel therein guilty of the most candalous behaviour;
his grief was immoderate. * He compares himself
in this ituation to a lover, who had been for a time
disgusted by the disagreeable manners, negligence,
and indelicacy, of his mistress. " In the fame man.
ner, fays he, his hameful flight, and unpardonable
negligence, had fifled my affection for him: I saw
nothing in all Pompey did, that could invite meto
accompany him in his retreat. But, now he is gone,
my love awakes; I cannot bear to be at a distance
from him; ror books, nor letters, nor philosophy,
can make me easy. I turn my eyes day and night
to the sea, like a bird that is going to take its flight."
These impulses were very forcible, but afterwards
divers refieetions counter-balanced them. Cicero
came to himflf again, when he confidered the strength
ar.d formidable activity of Cfar; and Pompey's
weakness, and the perpetual mistakes he thought he
saw in his conduct. If he was not satisfied with the
Generaliflimo, he heartily despised almost all his fol-
lowers. To begin with the Consuls, t he thought
* Sicut ,, -
.r .!t:ir: alienar- immunde, infulfa, indecorae, ficme
illus fagr, negligentiaeque, deformitas avertit ab amore. Nihilenim
dignumr facibat quare eus f comitem me adjungerem. Nunt
emergit anor; nunc deliderium ferre non pofinm; nunc nihii libri,
nihil littere, nihil dcetrina, pr-'cR ; ita dies & no&es, tanquam ail
ii;a. mare profeo, evolare cupio. ix. 0o.
t Cave :t;:- ciidni:-m rfic minoris his Confulibus. vii. 12.
Conluits puma aut Iulio tiiius moventur. viii. 15.

thev

they deserved the least esteem of any men in the world. A-. R. 73-
They were lighter than leaves, or feathers. He look- An4td.'
ed on L. Domitius as a brute; and on Ap. Claudius Cic. ad
as a weather-cock. On the other fide, he was tag- Att. viii.
gered by the example of Ser. Sulpicius, and some
other weighty persons; who, though they went out of
Rome with Pompey, seemed to be getting nearer and
nearer to Cafar. Add the follicitations of Cafar him-
·elf, and of those friends Cicero had in his party.
Yet all this could not surmount the invincible aver-
lion he had to Cafar; but only somewhat weakened
his attachment to Pompey.

We have some letters from Calius to Cicero, about vii. ad
this important affair. Cselius was a man of great Sa',n ',
genius, but wanted solidity, and was very deficient in
moral principles. * He wrote to Cicero very frank-
ly, that in civil commotions, as long as the contest
was merely verbal, it was right to take thejuftefi fide;
but, when the quarrel came to be decided by the
longest sword, it was proper to take the ftrongcfc fide;
and to think that best, that was fafelt. He had him-
self reduced this maxim to practice; and, though he
had always appeared zealous for the aristocratic party
and the laws, he left Pompey and the Senate in the
critical moment, and went over to Caxfar. Cicero
was far from embracing such a system. t Calius,
fays he to Atticus, has not persuaded me to alter my
way of thinking: I rather pity him for having altered
his."
Neither Cafar, nor any body for him, ever desired
Cicero to bear arms against Pompey. It would have
been an indecent proposal, which had no probability
of success. But he had chose who wrote to him, and
he wrote to him several times himself, to persuade
* Ilud te non arbitror fugere, cuinhomnines in diffenfione domeftica
debeant, quamdiu civiliter fine armis certetur, honelitorem cqul
partenm ubi ad belllm & caftra ventum fit, firmiorem ; & id me.lus
ltatuere quod tutius fit. Ep 14.
t Tantum abeIt ut meam ille Caelius) fententiam moveat, ut valde
teo ipli, quod de fua sententia deceflerit, peniitendum putein. Cc.
de Att. viii. 3.

Ez him

A.R. 7Ve. him to go to Rome with him. This was his motive.
Ant c He wanted much to decorate his party which, though

strong, was void of splendor and dignity. The Con.
fuls and all the Senators having retired with Pompey,
there remained in the capital only the lower people,
and a few persons of some rank, such as Atticus and
some others. Cfar therefore, though in pofleflion of
Rome, would have been there in a manner alone, or
at least without wherewith to represent the form of a
Commonwealth. To obviate this inconvenience, he
took great pains to re-assemble at Rome all the titled
persons he could, in order to do honour to his cause,
It was with this view that he strongly follicited the
Consul Lentulus; but, as we have seen, without fuc.
cess. He was more lucky with refpet to some of
the Pretors, Tribunes of the People, and other infe-
rior Magistrates. He succeeded also with Ser. Sulpi
cius, Volcatius Tullus, and M. Lepidus, all Consular
persons. But Cicero would have given an incompa.
rably greater lustre to the Senate; which was going
to be afrcmbled by Caesar's orders, and under his eyes.
Cafar thought it worth while to make an effort him-
self; and to try if he could not obtain that by an in-
terview, which had been refused to his letters. Ac-
cordingly, in his return from Brundisium, he went
through Formiae, where Cicero was.
C;c. ad Our Orator was prepared for this shock, and sus-
tt. ained it nobly. Cxfar pressed him extremely to

come to the Senate; and went so far as to fay, that
he thought his honour concerned; and that Cicero's
absence, in there circumstances, was a condemnation
of his cause. When he found he got nothing by his
importunity, " Well, adds he, come, if it is but to
" speak about peace." " Shall I be suffered, fays Ci-
" cero, to speak of it according to my real senti-
" ments ?" " Can you doubt of it, replies Cefar, and
"do you think I shall attempt to di&ate to you what
" you are to speak ?" " In that cafe, answers Cicero,
"' I hall fay that the Senate does not approve of in.
" vading Spain, nor of tranlporting troops into

" Greece;
8

" Greece; and I shall deplore the unhappy situation A. R. 73.

Ant. C.
* of Pompey." Cafar hereupon interrupted him by t49.
faying, that this was a language not to be suffered.
" I knew 'that well, replies Cicero, and that is the
, reason why I will not go to the Senate; since I must
" either fay away, or speak there in the flile you
, have heard." Cfar was extremely piqued, and
dropped these words, " that, since those who could
give him advice would not, he would take advice of
whoever would give it, and hould proceed to extre-
mities." However, to get off decently, he advised
Cicero to reconsider the affair, before he made his
final determination. This could not be refused; and
Celar went away, leaving Cicero well satisfied with
himself, with reason; for it required courage to resist
so formidable a man. However, we cannot but ap-
plaud Cefar's moderation; who, when he could have
forced him, suffered this refifance. It is true, he had
no right to compel Cicero to do what he desired. But
there is some merit in a man's not doing all the ill he.
is able to do.

Cafar's retinue alone would have been enough to
have hindered Cicero from joining him, if he had not
so many other reasons against it. It confidfed of peo-
ple, infamous for debauchery, loaded with debts,
contemners of law and religion, judicially branded,
baQifhed for crimes. Cicero knew them all, but had
never seen them all together before. What a collec-
tion ! How could he have associated with such wretches!
Satisfied, however, that he had offended Caesar by his
obstinate refusal, he resolved to cross the ea, and go
after Pompey.

He did not hurry himself in the execution of this cic. ad
resolution. The indifferent opinion he had of Pom- tt.x.
pey's proceedings, and of the conduct of the heads cc' a
of his party; the notion that crossed him of retiring viii. ad
to Malta, or some other neutral city; the follicitation Foam. 6.
of Crlius, who wrote him a kind, pathetic, letter, con-
juring him not to run into deftru&cion; the intreaties
of his wife Terentia, and of his beloved daughter

E 3 Tullia,

A.R. c- Tullia, who, by Atticus's advice, begged him to de
Ant. C ser his departure, until the success of Caesar's war

Spain against Pompey's Lieutenants was known a
this delayed his voyage above two months, but alte.
ed not his resolution.
cic. ad At last he embarked on the seventh of June, wid
Fm. xiv. his son, who a little before had put on the toga virili
7' at Arpinum; and, having got into Pompey's camp,

was received with open arms by every one, except
Plat. Cic. Caro, who alone blamed him. " I could not help,

"1 ays he to him, acting agreeably to the fyftemi
; have followed my whole life. But, as to you, you

w vas not necessitated to declare yourself Cfa'i
; enemy, and expose yourself to danger. You ought
" to have continued neuter, that, if there had been at

any time an opening for peace, you might have
" acted as a mediator."

Cato's reflection was just, and Cicero soon became
fcnfible of its truth. Unfit for war, and besides too
cilar-fighted to overlook any of the faults of his
par-v, he could not help talking of them; and ex.
preting his discontent, and repentance of the engage.
meats he had entered into. In consequence of which
Pr'pcv grew very cool to him, and gave him no
fn-- n t're management of affairs. Thus Cicero was
or a ;'. ritage to the party for which he declared;
and ~:o r.;hing by it himself but vexation, trouble,
and ian:ier.
C:c c. r.n )Iv return to Cefar, who went diretly from

;.: ix : t.,; i;terview with Cicero to Rome. That city was

a!rcad-. before his arrival, somewhat recovered from
the trouble and horrible agitation it had been thrown
in-:, by hc aight of Pompey and almott all the Senate.
S--ral Prxturs administered justice there; the Ediles
c-r .manking preparations for the publick games;
tr '.e arid private affairs were returned into the old
c,.nnc. Casfar's follicitations had also brought back
fume Senators of diftinfion; and, when he came to
Dic,i... tiwn, the Tribunes Anthony and Q. Cassius convok-

ecd th. Se.ate in one of the suburbs, that Caesar might

0be

be present without violation of the laws, which he A.R. 703.
pretended to refpet in some degree. A. C.

There Cefar pleaded his cause, and endeavoured Cer de B.
to throw all blame on his enemies and Pompey.ciV L 32.
After which he added these words, which in my
mind are very remarkable: * That he desired the
Senators to undertake the administration of the Re-
publick jointly with him. But that, if they declined
it through fear, he would take upon himself the bur-
then, and govern alone." This seems to me almost
a dire& proposal to them to make him Diaator.
And indeed it was proper to have some title to cloke
his enterprizes with. For all he had done since the
passage of the Rubicon was absolutely irregular, and
wanted even the form of legal authority. What con-
firms me in this opinion, is, that it appears by a letter
of Cicero, that the nomination of a Dictator was al- ix. adAtt.
ready bruited about. But this was what could not be '
brought to bear at this time. People probably were
not sufficiently prepared as yet. And Cafar, who was
not scrupulous, continued to at as he had began, by
force alone.

He concluded his discourse to the Senate, by fay-
ing, + " That it would be proper to fend a deputa-
tion to Pompey, to treat of an accommodation. That,
for his part, he was not frighted at the difficulty that
Pompey started some time before in the Senate; and
that he did not think, xhat to fend Deputies was to ac-
knowledge the superiority of him to whom they were
sent, and a sign of timidity in the fender. That this
was a little, low, way of thinking; and that, in the
* Orat ac poftalat, Rempublicam fufcipiant atque una fecum admi-
miftrent. Sin timore defugiant, illi fe oneri non defuturum, & per fe
Rempublicam adminiftraturum.
t Legatos ad Pompeium de compofitione mitti oportere. Neque fe
reformidare quoi in Senatu paulo ante Pompeius dixiffet, ad quos le.
gati mitterentur, eis au&tontatem attribui, timoremque eorun qui
mitterent fignificari. Tenuis atquc infirmi hae animi videri. Se vero
at operibus antcire tuduerit, sic ufitia & aequitaa velle faperare.

E 4 Jame

A.R. -;. fame manner, as he had endeavoured at a fupriririt
A"t9 C. in aion, he fiould also itrive to be superior injuftic

and equity."

Thus, such men as Cefar make a jest of the mos
sacred opinions, the most venerable maxims. Juftic
was what he little troubled himself about; but he wa
glad to procure the appearance of it, by hewing at
inclination for a peace, which he knew impracicable
and which he would have opposed, had he thought
it feasible.
Dio. He spoke in the fame stile to the People, who as.

fenbled also out of the city to hear him. He pro
miled them, besides, to take great care to keep up
plenty in Rome, by fending corn from Sicily and Sart
dinia, and made a donative of * three hundred fef.
terces a man. In consequence of these pacific dif.
courses, the Romans resumed the habit of peaci
which had been disused from the taking of Rimini.
But they were far from being easy. The great num.
ber of Caesar's soldiers in the city; the finall confi.
dence to be put in a language which the circumstances
of affairs might dictate; the examples of Marius and
Sylla, who had made as fair promises at first, how-
ever positively they a&ed afterwards; all there things
created anxiety and terror.
cas What frengthened these fuiicions was, that the

deputation proposed by Cfar was never sent. No
Senator would undertake it; whether they were afraid
of Pompey, as Cafar fays in his omientaries o*
were aware of the imposSibility of projefing a peace
between two enemies, who neither of them desired it.

Caesar came to Rome with an intention to do many
things, which he does nt acquaint as With, but which
we may in part guess at. The Dit&atorhip for him.
self, the recalling of those who had been banished in
consequence of the laws made by Pompey in his third
Corifulfhip, were, probably, ome of the molt con,
fiderabie. Without entering into particulars, he.fys

Two pounds fix hillingsuai ten-pence half-penny.

in

in general, that the Tribune L. Metellus, suborned by AR. 7o1.
his enemy, opposed and hindered him in every thing; Ant. C
and made him wade several days in Rome, to no pur-
pose. But he entirely omits the most violent contest
he had with that Tribune. The reason of which
omiflion will sufficiently appear from the simple rela-
tion of the fat.

He wanted money; and resolved to take all heLucan.m.
could find in the public Treasury. Metellus opposing PUt. crf.
this, Cfar spoke to him with unusual haughtiness. Dio.
, It is not to the purpose, fays he, to talk of law in
s the mildft of arms. I am Master, not only of the

Money, but of the Lives of all those I have con-
( quered." These terrible words did not intimidate
the Tribune and, as it was necessary to break open
the doors of the Treasury, the Consuls having carried
away the keys, he ran thither, to prevent, by the au-
thority of his office, such a violence. Cefar, losing
all patience, threatened him with death, in exprei
terms; and added, " Young man, confider, that it

coss me more to fay such a thing, than to do it."
The Tribune hereupon, being terrified, retired.

Some people yet ventured to represent to Caffar,
that there was in the Treasury some money sorbad to
be meddled with, under the most horrible imprecati-
ons, unless in a war .with the Gauls. " I have en-

tirely removed, fays Cafar, that scruple, by sub-
"duing Gaul, and putting it out of the power of the
"Gauls to make war on us for the future." He then
commanded the doors and locks to be broke open,
and took away all he found there; which was, ac-
cording to Pliny, twenty-five thousand bars of gold, Plin.
thirty-five thousand of silver, and * forty millions ofxxxiii.
lefterces.

The fame Pliny reports, that Cefar, at the fame
time, took out of the Treasury fifteen hundred pounds Idem.xix
of Laser of Cyrene, a drug of great price among the
ancients, and much esteemed by them, not only for

About three hundred thousand pounds sterling.

medicinal

a.R. 3. medicinal use, but also for sauce. This drug is, how-
Ant C. ever, according to the opinion of an author much
Gtotfroi. to be depended on in these matters, what we now call
Iat.Med. Affa-fcetida, whose smell and taste is scarce to be
T. II.
p. 66. borne. Yet even at this time the Orientals are very

fond of it.

Cafar doubtless was, with reason, ashamed to tranf-
mit to posterity such an heinous outrage. He seems
to have had a mind to palliate it somewhat, by flip-
ping into his narration a fat, which, if true, would
excuse the most odious circumstance attending it. He
Czf de relates, that the Consul Lentulus, soon after he left
B.Ci-.I. Rome, was fnt bck again, by Pompey, to take the

money out of the public Treasury; and that, while
he was there, he imagined, on a sudden (on a false
alarm) that the enemy was at the city-gates; which
frightenrd him so, that he thought of nothing but
la;ing himlei;'; and made off, leaving the Treasury
open. This fad, in itfeif not very probable, is en-
tire.y destroyed by the concurring testimony of all
other v. ritzrs; w ho affirm, that Casfar found the Trea-
fc;v iuot, and bruke it open.
C-c ad ir is a!so certain, that this audacious action render-
A-::-. ed hi.: oous to the People, till then, devoted to
+' hi;. This he so well knew, that he durst not harangue

them, as he proposed, before his departure. Cicero
obi'-rvcs *, that he did himself hurt, destroying, by
piuni.ring the Treasury, the opinion he laboured to
inculcate of his opulence; and, by his threats to Me-
tellus, the affected clemency he so much valued him-
self upon.
Gc. ibid. I was not his enemies only, who confidered his

clemency as affected: Curio.talked in the fame strain.
He told Cicero, that Metellus's death, had he made
himself be killed, would have been the signal for a
general massacre; that Casfar was not naturally mer-
ciful, but only affeced it, to make himself popular;

* Qui duarum rerum simulationem tam cito amiferit, manfuetudi.
is in .Met;o, divitiaium in erario. Cc. ad Att. X. S.

and

and that, if he once found he had loft the favour of R. 7o3.
the People, he would become cruel. But these Ant. c
discourses of Curio rather shew what he himself
thought, than what Caesar thought. In fat, all those
who were about him, persuaded him to put his ene-
mies to the sword. And it is this that makes the en-
comium of his clemency, and proves the glory thence
resulting to be due to him alone, since he constantly
adhered thereto, against the advice, and maugre the
follicitations of those who did him the greatest service.

SECT. II.
Cafar, before he sets out for Spain, appoints Commanders

in his name in Italy, and several provinces. Mar-
feilles huts its gates against him; he besieges it. He
cuts down a conecrated wood, to en;ploy it in his works.
He leaves the conduct of the iege to Trebonius, and
continues his route to Spain. Pompey's forces in Spain.
Afranius and Petreius encamp on the Segre, near Le-
rida. It appears, that Cefar's army was strong and
numerous. Gaulr/b cavalry. He Jfraitens the enemy.
Fight, in which he does not ucceed. He is in great
difficulties. He recavers his superiority. He obliges
the enemy to leave their camp. He pursues them, and
prevents their pasing the Ebre. He spares his enemies,
when he has it in his power to cut them to pieces; chuf-
ing to reduce them to lay down their arms. reaty al-
mot concluded between the oldiers of the two armies.
Petreius prevents its execution. Cruelty of that Lieu-
tenant of Pompey. Cdfar's clemency. The war re-
newed. Cefar, by harra/ing and diirefting his ene-
mies, compels them tofurrender. Interview of Afra-
nius and Cefar ; who insists only on the di/banding of the
adversary troops. Tbat condition is agreed to, and
executed. Cifar easily subdues Ulterior Spain; after
which he goes before Marseilles. Account of what
bad pased at tbefiege of Marseilles, in Caear's ab/ence.
Perfidy charged on the inhabitants of Marseilles, with

little

littk probability. Cefr's severe, but not cruel, brba-
viurw t hem. Cefar's party receives a cbeck in Ilb-
ricum. he soldiers of one of Cfear's cohorts kill e
another, rather tban surrender. Curio pajes over into
Africa, to wage war with Altius Varus, and Juia,
King of Mauritania. Curio's success, atfirft. arat
eadeavours to debauchb is troops. Curio's confarny in
that danger. His difcovrfes to the Council of war, and
bte soldiery. The soldiers promise fidelity. He defeats
Vars. J7ba ccmes to the affiance of Varus. Curio's
presumption. Battle, in which Curio's army is entirely
rwuted. Curio makes himelf be killed on thefpot. Ua-

ppy fate of alms all who were not slain in the battle.
7uba's cruelly and arrogance. Rfieion on the misfor-
tuxe ard rajane~f of Cu;io.
- R. 7c?. /1-2SAR, before he set out for Spain, took proper
Art. . C meafurcs to secure the poffelfion of Italy, and
Ap9n. the provinces he left behind. He gave the Govern-

ment of Rome to Lepidus, then Praetor; and who
afterwards usurped the Sovereign Power (with An-
thony and young Cafar) under the title of Triumvir.
Anthony, who was then Tribune, had the care of
Italy. His brother, C. Antonius, had the Govern-
ment of Illyricum, and Crassus that of Cisalpine
Gaul. Cefar also gave orders for building and equip-
ping two fleets; one on the Adriatic Sea, and the
other on the Tuscan. Dolabella, Cicero's fon-in-law,
had the Command of the first; and the son of the
Orator Horrenfius that of the second. We have seen,
that Valerius had been sent into Sardinia, and Curio
into Sicily, to go from thence into Africa. Cefar's
Jos. xiv. care extended even to Syria, and the East. He et at
13' liberty the unfortunate Ariftobulus, formerly King of

the Jews, that he might go into Judaa, and raise
some commotions, if poflible, and thwart Metellus
Scipio, who was assembling forces in Syria, for Pom-
pey's service. When he had made there dispositions,
Cadar thought he might give himself entirely to his

Spanish

Spanish expedition. The city of Marseilles occasioned A.R. 7-.
a delay, which, I believe, he did not expect. A.

When he came near it, he found the gates shut; Cf de B.
and was informed, the inhabitants made all forts of civ. 1 34
preparations for a vigorous defence, in cafe they were
besieged. The citizens of Marseilles thought they
performed the duty of ancient and faithful allies of
Rome, by espousing Pompey's party, with whom
they saw the Senate and Consuls. I may even fay,
that, having the greatest veneration for the laws of
probity and virtue (for such they are represented by
ancient writers) they could not be well-affected to
Cafar. It is true, they had ome obligations to him;
but so they had to Pompey too, who had reminded
their Deputies thereof, when constrained to leave
Rome. For there reasons they had determined not to
admit Caesar into their city; and it appears, that
they had even entered into engagements with Domi-
tius; who, since the affair of Corfinium, had con-
cealed himself at an estate he had on the coast of
Tuscany, and had equipped seven barks, with which
he had actually set fail for Marseilles.

Caesar was not a man to put up the,affiont done
him by the Marfeillians, in refusing him admittance
into their town. He sent for the Chiefs of the Pub-
lic Council, and endeavoured to bring them over by
gentle exhortations, pronounced however with the
force of authority. These Deputies, having heard
him, returned into the town, and brought back the
answer of their Senate to this purpose: " That they
saw the Romans divided into two parties; and that it
did not belong to them to decide such a quarrel. That
at the head of there parties were Pompey and Cafar,
both of them patrons and protectors of their city.
That in such a conjuncture, it best became them to be
neuter; and to refuse both of the Competitors ad-
mittance, either into their city, or port." This lan-
guiage was specious, but insincere; for, at the fairm
time that they excluded Caelar, they admitted Domi-

tius;

AR.ots.tius; who got by sea into the town, and took tht

t. c military Command.

Caesar was therefore necessitated either to retire ig,
nominioufly, or to besiege Mareilles. He chose the
latter; brought three legions before the town, and
began to ere& batteries. For the conftrution of the
towers, galleries, and other works, then used in sieges,
he ordered a neighbouring wood to be cut down.
This wood was consecrated; and the soldiers were
scrupulous about it. Caesar, who was not at all fu-
perftitious, or, to speak properly, not at all religious,
tw.I. . but an absolute Epicurean, in speculation and prac-

tice; takes himself an ax, cuts down a tree, and, by
his example, overcomes the timid relutance of his
soldiers.

To deprive the besieged of the advantage of the
Tea, he built at Aries twelve gallies; which were
launched within thirty days from the cutting of the
wood they were composed of. He gave the Com-
mand of this little Beet to D. Brutus; and, having
direced the siege, left the care of it to Trebonius;
and continued his route towards Spain, where he had
sent before him C. Fabius, with three legions, that
had wintered about Narbonne. His other legions,
whose quarters were more remote, had orders to fol-
low, as falf as they could.

Pompey had a considerable force in Spain. It con-
fiPted of seven legions, fix of which had been raised in
Italy, and the seventh in that country. These seven
legions were distributed under three of Pompey's
Lieutenants, Afranius, a Consular person, Petreius,
who had been Pretor, and * M. Varro. The firt
had three of them under him; and his Government
extended from the Pyrenaean mountains to the Gua-
dalquivir. The other two had each two legions; and
commanded, the one in the country between the Gua-
* I fee no reason not to think, that this third Lieutenant of Porn-
py was the learned Varro who had already served under him in the

irat~l v~.~ ~dalquiir

dalquivir

dalquivir and the Gaudiana, and the other in Lufita- A.R.7or
nia. Pompey having sent to them Vibullius Rufug, Ant. C
one of those who escaped at Corfinium, to acquaint
them, that they must prepare to make head against
Ca far; they consulted together, and agreed, that
Petreius hould join Afranius with his two legions;
and that Varro liould stay and secure Ulterior Spain.
Petreius and Afranius, when united, found them-
selves at the head of five legions, and eighty Spanish
cohorts, some light, some heavy, armed; making,
in all, above sixty thousand men. With this force
they came and encamped near Lerida, on the Segre;
which they thought an advantageous post. heir
camp was on an eminence: they had a communication
with the town; and the Segre in front, over which
there was, at that place, a ftone-bridge, which secured
their passage: and in their rear was a fertile plain,
terminated by another river, called Cinca. In this
situation they hoped to be able to flop Cfar, and
cover all Spain. Afranius had also took possession of
the defiles of the Pyrenean mountains; but Fabius
easily forced them, made long marches towards Lerida,
and encamped over-againft the enemy, on the other
fide of the river.

We do not know what number of legions and auxi-
liaries Caesar's army consisted of, when it was corn-
pleat; not but he had informed us in his Commenta-
ries, but the text is here defective. There is reason
to believe it was numerous; and we know, in particu-
lar, that a fine body of Gaulifli horse contributed much
to his victory.

One reason that made Cafar particularly careful to
strengthen his army, was a rumour, that Pompey
was coming with his whole force through Mauritania
into Spain. This it was too, perhaps, which made
him take a singular precaution to secure the fidelity of
his troops. He borrowed money of the officers;
which he distributed among the soldiers; and thus
secured the first by interest, and the others by grati-
tude. The officers had entrusted him with part of

their

A.L7o3. their fortune; and the soldiers loved him for hi

c ' bounty.

Nothing of consequence happened in Spain, during
Cafar's absence; except that one of the two bridge
Fabius had on the Segre being broke down on a fud-
den, by the violence of the winds and floods, two of
his legions were by that accident cut off, and fepa-
rated from the reft of the army. Afranius laid hold
of the opportunity, and attacked them; and put
them in some danger. But Plancus, who com-
manded them, making a vigorous defence, Fabius
had time to come to his assistance, whereupon both ar-
mies returned to their camps, without much loss on
either fide.

Two days after this, Cafar arrived, eorted by
nine hundred horse, which he kept for a body-guard.
He began by re-eftablihing, the night after his arri-
val, the broken bridge. The next day he crofed the
Segre, and offered battle to Afranius; who contented
himself with drawing his forces out of the camp, and
forming them in order of battle, half way down the
hill, but would not descend into the plain. Csefar,
finding he declined an engagement, resolved to itraitcn
him, and to encamp in the very place he had ad-
vanced to; which was within four hundred paces of
the hill on which Pompey's Lieutenants were en-
camped. In order to effect this, he made the third
line of his army dig a ditch in front of the enemy,
while the two first continued in battalia. This was
done without any interruption from Petreius or Afra-
nius, who had not the least suspicion of what he was
about: and, when it was finished, Caesar retreated,
with his whole army, behind the ditch, and pased
there the night. The following days he compleated
the whole circuit, with its ramparts and parapets;
following throughout the fame method, and keeping
the greatest part of his troops under arms, to cover
those who worked. He thus formed a camp, in the
fight of the enemy, without loss, hazard, or incon-
venience; and brought into it all that -reaained in

the

he old camp, which was fix cohorts, with the bag AR. 703.

r~~~~~~~~~~~age. ~Ant. C.
Between the hill that Pompey's Lieutenants.occt- 49
ied, and the city of Lerida, was a plain of about
ree hundred paces; in the midst of which was a ri-
ng ground, which C2far wanted to take possession of,
ecaufe, by that means, he could cut off Afranius's
ommunication with the town, where his magazines
ere, and also with the ftone-bridge. Afranius hav
g found out his design, was aware of the confe-
uences. There was a long and sharp combat about
at hillock; wherein Cafar's troops had like to have
cen defeated; and, at last, though they behaved
eli, Afranius had the advantage, as he kept the pof-
effon of the hillock. He then fortified it, and posted
here a large body of troops.
Cafar observes, that one reason for his not succeed-
ng in this aion was, that the enemy's manner of
ghting was new to his soldiers. For, having been
ong in Spain, they had, as it is usual, given into the
anners of the country. They fought almost like
arbarians: advancing boldly, and then retiring; nei-
her taking care to keep their ranks, nor thinking it
ifhonourable to quit their post. This method is
etainly inferior to that of fighting in a compat body,
ithout stirring: but, as it was new and unexpeted,
t disordered Cfar's soldiers.
This beginning of bad fortune to Cefar was oon
'lowed by other disasters. The Segre, being swelled
an extraordinary manner, broke down the two
ridges Fabius had built over it: so that Caesar found
mfelf shut up between two rivers, the Segre and
he Cinca, in a space of no more than ten leagues, in
ant of provisions, which he could not get from the
ountry itself, because Pompey's Lieutenants had eat
t up; nor receive by convoys from Gaul and Italy,
she could not cross the river. Afranius, on the
ontrary, abounded in all things. He had large ma-
azines; and besides his bridge, as it was of stone,
ad withstood the force of the water; so that he was
VOL. IX. F at

A. R. 703. at liberty to extend himself, and secure the palige-
At c every thing that came to his camp. The Spani'

that were in his army did him great service, and i
commoded Caesar much. They were acquainted
the country, were active and alert, scoured about a
fell on all who straggled from C-efar's camp in set
of provisions and forage. The rivers themfels
not impede them; tey were accufomed to
them on blown-up skins, which they always broug
with them into the field. Thus was Cefar in a man
ner besieged, and in danger of having his army ruine
by want.

He endeavoured to re-establish his bridges, b
could not get the better of the obstacles he met wit
from the water and enemy at once. A great convo
was come from Gaul, consisting of archers, Gaulit
horse, with many carts and much baggage, and about
fix thousand men, of all forts, without discipline or
commander. The river ftopt them short. Afraniu
having intelligence of it, crossed the Segre with al
his cavalry and three legions; and attacked them,
when they least expected it. The valour of tie
Gaulish horse aved them; for, by their long refifl.
ance, they gave the others time to gain the moun.
tains, where they were safe. They only loft
hundred archers, a few troopers, and ome ftrvn
and baggage.

lThis, however, was an additional misfortune to
Cefar. The price of provisions rose upon it in hi
camr ; and a bushel of corn, which was near a fbirth
lels than ours, fold there for fifty denarii *.

This news having reached Rome, aid beihg exag.
gerated, as uual, by common report, and the letters
Of Pompey's Lieutenants and their friends, Cafar was
thought to be undone; and many illustrious Senators,
who, till then, had doubted for whom to declare, went
into Greece, thinking it a ftep in which they ran no
ric;qu, and which, notwithllanding, was not so late

* A.!moft eight fnillingi

2

as to subjet them to the reproach of having waited A. R. 703.
for the event of things. I do not know, whether Ci- Ant. C.
cero is to be ranked with these, or whether he was
gone ofme time before.

Catfar well knew how to bring back fortune; and
to prove that a great genius, though involved in. dif-
ficulties, is always superior to men of moderate ca-
pacities, to whom circumstances have given some ad-
vantage. And this is the expedient he thought of.
He built Some light barks, in imitation of some he
had seen in Great-Britain, whose keel and ribs were
of wood, and the reft of wicker, covered with leather.
When he had got a sufficient number, he ent them
bynight, in waggons, twenty-two miles off his camp. In
these he embarked a good number of soldiers, and sent
them over the river; took poffeflion of a little hill on
the other fide; threw up a fortification before the
enemy thought of hindering him; posted a legion in
this fortification; and then threw a bridge over the
Segre in two days.

The first use he made of his bridge, was to collect
the great convoy that had been in such danger: the
subsistence of the troops became hereupon easier; and,
the very day the bridge was finished, great part of his
cavalry went over, and fell on the erlemy's foragers,
who expected nothing less; cut to pieces a whole
Spanish cohort, and returned to the camp with great
booty. At the fame time Cfar had good news
from the siege of Marseilles; which heartened his
army greatly: and, from this period, Cfar acquired
a uperiority over Afranius, which continually in-
creased, till his decisive vi&tory. His cavalry, which
was very fine and numerous, harraffed the enemy
greatly. They no longer durst disperse for forage;
or, if they did, suffered for it. At last, they were re-
duced to forage in the night, contrary to the general
custom of war.

As soon as Cafar's affairs were in a good situation,
the neighbouring nations eagerly fought his friend-
flip; and, in consequence of it, sent him provisions.

F 2 Afra-

A--K. 3 Afranius loft every day some ally. The spirit of de.
A--
. fetion spread far and wide; and some distant na.

tions renounced their engagements with Pompey's
Lieutenants, and entered into new ones with Csfar.

Afranius began to be terrified. Cafar increased
his fright, by one of those enterprizes which hew in
him both a genius fertile in expedients, and a courage
equal to any attempt. His bridge was above seven
leagues off his camp, and consequently his cavalry
had a great way to go to cross the river. He be-
thought himleif of draining the river, by turning some
of its water into canals thirty feet deep, so as to make
it fordable. Afranius and Petreius were apprehensive,
that, when the work was finished, Cfar's cavalry
would entirely cut off their provisions and forage.
They therefore thought proper to quit a post that was
no longer tenable; and to carry the war into Celtibe-
ria, where Pompey was in great repute, on account
of his exploits against Sertorius, whereas the name of
Ctf.r was little known. They reckoned to get from
thence considerable reinforcements; and, by taking
the advantage of places, to spin out the war, and so
gain the winter.

In order to execute this plan, they were to pass the
Ebre. They therefore collected all the boats to be
found on that river, designing to make a bridge of
them at Octogefa, a city on the Ebre, at a small dif-
tance to the left of the Segre, and twenty miles from
t;:cr czmp. They perceived that Cfar's work ad-
vanced. Already the water of the Segre was so di-
miniii eJ, that the cavalry could, with some difficulty,
pans over, and it took the infantry no higher than the
Ihoulders. Pompey's Lieutenants thought it now time
t- retreat, anti, having first ent over the Segre two
leai:ns to mark out a camp, they followed them oon
v.-:t the rel: of their forces, leaving only two cohorts
i:: -r-'n.^ at Lerida.

Citar had a n.ind to pursue them, but was much
e.;m'arraffid .how to do it. If he went with the whole
art.?. ovc:r ilis b:-idge, he lengthened his march pro-

digioufy,

digioufly, and gave Afranius time enough to get to A. R. 7o.
the Ebre. To expose his infantry, by passing a river, Ant. .
whose height was still so considerable, was to rifque
much; and, perhaps, he was afraid, that his soldiers
were not disposed to undertake it. His cavalry he
could use, of which he sent a large detachment over
the Segre; who overtake the enemy, harrafs them,
fatigue them, and prevent their advancing. The
combatants were seen from the hills near Caesar's en-
campment. At this fight the legionary soldiers come
of themselves into the sentiments he wished; they are
enraged to fee the enemy escape them, they address
themselves to their Officers, and desire them to beg
of their General not to spare them ; they declare, that
they fear neither danger nor fatigue, and that they
are ready to pass the river as the horse had done. C-
far asseted some relu&tance, then yielded to their in-
treaties: and, having withdrawn from every com-
pany such as were weak of body or of less courage
than the reft, he left them in the camp with a legion
and all the baggage. The reft of the army happily
passed the river, by the afliftance of a double line of
cavalry, placed above and below them. Some of the
infantry were carried away by the violence of the cur-
rent, but they were picked up and saved by the horse
below them, so that not one man was loft. This
great obstacle being overcome, every thing else was
easy; and notwithstanding the army was obliged to
make a circuit of fix miles, notwithstanding the time
necessarily loft in crossing the river; the ardour of
Cafar's soldiers was such, that they got up at the
ninth hour of the day to the enemy, who had et out
at midnight.

When Afranius perceived them at rome distance,
being with reason intimidated, he suspended his
march, halted on an eminence, and formed in order
of battle. Cfar would not hazard an ation with his
troops thus fatigued, and halted likewise in the plain.
On this, the enemy resumed their march, and he the
pursuit. At last they encamped, in which they com-

F 3 mitted

-. R. 7o0. nitted a great fault. For five miles off were oUilt.
Ant C. tains and defiles, where a very small number of men

+9' might have ftopt Czfar's whole army, by which eas

they would have continued their march to the Ebe,
without fear or danger. But, being fatigued by
long march, during the whole of which they had coh.
tinual skirmishes with Cefar's cavalry, they deferred
every thing until the next day. The opportunity,
thus negleted, never returned, and this was the cauI
of their ruin.

About midnight, Cafar was informed that Porn.
pey's Lieutenants were decamping without noise. Im-
mediately he gives his army the signal to march. The
enemy, finding they hould be pursued, kept still;
being afraid of a nocturnal fight, wherein they would
have had greatly the disadvantage, on account of their
heavy baggage which they had with them, and the fu-
periority of Cfar's cavalry. As, therefore, they
could not give the flip to their vigilant adversary, they
resolved not to hurry themselves, but to take their
own time, and march at their ease by day-light; fa-
tisfied they should then be more able to defertd them-
selves, when attacked on their route. But this was
not Ctfar's design. Full of that fire, which we can
never admire too much, he had formed a scheme to
go round the enemy's camp, and get before them to
the defiles of the mountains. Afranius was matter of
the dire&t road. Cfar was therefore obliged to march
through valiies and precipices, and over steep rocks,
which the soldiers could not climb, but by difencum-
bering themselves of their arms, and returning them
afterwards to one another. In this march they seemed
at firfl to turn their backs on the enemy; wherefore
Afranius's soldiers, who observed them from their
camp, insulted them on their supposed flight. But
they were strangely furprized, when they saw them as-
ter ome time turn to the right, so that the most ad-
vanced of them were near their camp. They then
ran-all to arms, and were for making haste to the
mountains. But the time was past: Cafar had got

the

the ftrt of them: and as his cavalry perpetually in- A.R. 703,
commoded the enemy, and retarded their march; his Ant. C
legions, notwithstanding the difficult ways, got sirss to
the defiles.

Afranius saw now that he had the enemy both in
front and rear. In this distress he halted on an emi;
nence, from whence he detached four Spaniflh cohorts
to take poffcffion of the highest mountain thereabouts.
His intention was to get to O&ogefa over the hills,
as he was debarred the way of the plain. But Caesar's
cavalry surrounded, and cut thole four cohorts to
pieces, in fight of both armies.

Cafar had a fine opportunity to exterminate Afra-
nius's army, which, in the consternation it then was,
would have made little resistance. He was pressed,
on all fides, to give the signal; and the Officers got
round him, proving by arguments, which he cer-
tainly had no occasion for, that vi&ory was inevitable.
But he absolutely refused to engage; because, he
knew, he could bring things to a conclusion, without
drawing a sword, and reduce the enemy by famine.
" Why Ihould I," said he, " even supposing the
" event of the battle to be fortunate, why hould I
"expose to death and wounds soldiers who have de-
"served so well of me ? Why should I tempt fortune ?
' It is less worthy of a good General to gain the vic-
"tory by his kill, than by the force of his arms ?"
He was also, as he assures us, touched with compassion
for Afranius's soldiers; who, after all, were his coun-
trymen, and whom he must have slaughtered, when
he could equally succeed without touching their lives.
Perhaps, also, he too much despised Poimpey's Lieu-
tenants to match himself with them, and had a mind to
reduce them to the mortifying neceflity of-laying down
their arms, and begging quarter.

This his resolution was not at- all relished by his
army; who, in their discontent, said aloud, that since
Cafar did not lay hold of so favourable an opportu-
nity, nor let them fight when they had a mind, they
would not fight when he had a mind; But nothing

F 4 could

A.R 703. could hake him. He was so sure of conquest, that
Anit C. he even retreated a little, to give Afranius and Pe.

treius liberty to regain their camp, which they did.
He then posted troops on the mountains to guard the
defiles, and came and encamped as near the enemy as
pofible.

Caesar was near reaping the very next day the fruits
of his clemency and good condut. For Pompey's
Lieutenants having undertook to draw a fofle and pa-
rapet from their camp to the place where they wa-
tered, and being gone to give directions themselves
about the work, many of their soldiers, in their ab-
fence, entered into conversation with those they
knew in Cfar's army. They began by thanking
them for having spared them the day before, owning
they were indebted to them for their lives. After-
wards they asked them, if they might trust to Cafar's
honour; testifying much grief, at being obliged to
fight with their countrymen and relations, with whom
they were united by the holieft ties. At last, they
Itipulated even for their Generals, whom they would
not seem to betray; and promised, if the lives of
Afranius and Petreius were granted them, to change
i;des. They had already ent ome of their principal
Offcers to negotiate with Cxfar; and, these prelimi-
naries to an accommodation being fettled, the soldiers
of both armies went into one another's encampment,
so that the two camps were now in a manner one.
Things were carried to such a length, that Afranius's
or. ent to Cafar, to desire he would give his word
for his life, and that of his father. The joy was ge-
neral, they mutually congratulated each other; the
one, in that they had escaped so imminent danger;
and the other, in that they had brought to a happy
ccnclufion so i;portant an enterprize without itriking
a blow.

This was the fibuation of affairs, when Afranius and
Pe:reius, being informed thereof, returned to their
camp. Afranius came easily to a resolution, being
rrcFared for all events. But Petreius was not wanting

to

to himself. He arms his slaves, and, joining them to A. R. 70.-
his Spanish guard, falls on such of Cafar's soldiers as Ant. C.
he found among his own; kills some of them, and 4
forces the reft to make off.

After this he goes through the whole camp, beg-
ging his troops'with tears to have pity on him, and
Pompey their General; and that they would not de-
liver them. both up to the cruel vengeance of their
enemies. Every one upon this flocks to the head-
quarters. There Petreius proposes to the army to
bind themselves by a new oath, not to abandon nor
betray their: Commanders, nor to at separately, but
all in concert for the common good. He himself
took this oath first, and then exa&ted it of Afranius,
afterwards of the Officers, and lastly of every soldier.

Petreius's zeal flopped not here, he extended it
even to cruelty. He issued an order, that all those
who had any of Cafar's soldiers in their tents ihould
signify it, that they might be put to death in the
fight of the whole army. Some obeyed; but the ma-
jority detested this bloody order; they carefully hid
those who were under their protecion, and procured
them means to escape in the night. However, they
all puntually observed their new oath. The agree-
ment they had almost concluded with Cafar was for-
got, and nothing was now thought of but renewing
the war.

It was in Cafar's power to have made reprizals,
for he had in his camp many of the enemy's officers
and soldiers. But he was not at all disposed to make
use of that right, which is often confidered as legal,
but, if cooly examined, is very inhuman. He let
thrn all retire, without putting them in fear. Some
of the Tribunes and Centurions chose to flay with him,
and take on in his service. He entertained these with
pleasure, and always distinguished, honoured, and
advanced, them.

Petreius found it easier to renew the war, than to
sustain it. He could neither forage, nor water, with-
:ut much difficulty and danger. Provisions were

scarce

A.R. o. scarce in his camp, and the Spaniards defrted it
ht. c shoals. He had no other redurce left dian to get to

fnme fortress, under whose walls he might elter
himself. He was between Tarragone and Leida ad
was some time before he determined, towards which
of those cities he fould march. The last being ndaefl,
he resolved to return there. . -

But the difficulty was how to get at it.. Cfar's
cavalry continually harrafled his flying troops.; ia
the plains, the rear, by making head from .time.to
time against it, gave the van means of advancing
somewhat. When they fell in with an eminence, they
had more advantage; because those who were first
could cover them behind. But, when they were to
descend, it was exayly the contrary. Then the legi-
ons turned upon the adversary's cavalry, and endra-
voured to drive them back a good way, after which
they ran down the valley precipitately, until they came
to the opposite eminence. The infantry did all; for
their cavalry was so terrified, that, far.from bing of
any service, they were forced to place it in the center,
to secure it.

It is easy to perceive, that so painful, and iner-
rupted, a march, could not be expeditious. When
Afranius and Petreius had advanced four miles, they
halted on an eminence, and drew a line before them,
as it were to encamp; but did not unload their beasts
of burthen. Car was hereby deceived; he began
to establish his camp, pitched his tents, and sent his
cavalry to forage. This was what Pompey's Lieute-
nants wanted. Suddenv therefore, towards noon,
they resume their march briskly, hoping to be rid of
that formidable cavalry, which so much incommoded
them. But Caesar sets out immediately with his legi-
ons, leaving a few cohorts to guard the baggage, and
fends orders to his cavalry to return with all diligence.
The cavalry returned with all diligence, ad, having
overtook the enemy before the close of day, attacked
them b vigoroully, that they were forced to encamp

where

where they then were, far from any water, and on very A. R. 7Fe
disadvantageous ground. Ant. C

Caesar could have given a good account of this 4'
army, if he had attacked them. But he pursued his
old plan, intending to compel the enemy to surrender,
by harrafing them, and cutting them off from all ne-
ceffaries. They were in the worst of situations. As
their camp was bad, they endeavoured to change it.
But the farther they extended, in order to better their
position, the farther they went from water: and to
avoid one inconvenience fell into another. The first
night no body went out of the camp for water, and
the next day the whole army was obliged to do it in
order of battle, so that they could not forage that day.
Want, and the desire of marching with less difficulty,
soon constrained them to kill all the beasts of burthen.

Cafar strangely augmented their confusion by be-
ginning to draw lines round their camp, to inclose
them. He had already worked hard on them for two
days, and made a considerable progress; when Afra-
nius and Petreius, sensible of the consequences, drew
all their forces out of the camp, and formed them in
order of battle. Cafar presently called in his work-
men, and put his army in a condition to receive them,
if they attacked him; but would not enter the firRf
into ation. Pompey's Lieutenants, feeing him in so
good order, kept quiet; and in the evening.both ar-
mies retired, without coming to blows. The next
day, which was the fourth from the setting about the
lines, Caesar prepared to finish them. Afranius and
Petreius endeavoured, as their last resource, to find a
fordable place in the Segre. But their vigilant adver-
fary ent immediately over the river his light-armed
Germans, and a good part of his cavalry, and posted
on the banks at a small distance from one another many
good corps-de-gardes.

At last Pompey's Lieutenants, having no hope left,
and being in want of every thing, wood, forage, wa-
ter, corn, were forced to do as Cafar desired. Afra-
nius asked for an interview; and that it might be, if

possible,

A. R. 703. possible, in some place out of the fight of the soldiers
Ant. C. Cefar consented to the interview, but not under the

49' circumflance Afranius desired. This last was all sub.

mission, and, having given his son for an hostage, went
to the place appointed by the Vitor. The converfa.
tion was at the head of the two armies, who could hear
all that passed on both fides.

Afranius spoke with great humility. He excused
himself on account of the fidelity he owed to Pompey
his General, acknowledged himself vanquilhed, and
conjured Cefar very submissively, not to make a rigor-
ous use of his vicory, but to spare the lives of his un-
happy countrymen.

Caesar, though willing to exert his clemency, had
yet a mind to prove Afranius in the wrong. He told
him, that he and his collegue were only to blame, and
the only enemies to peace; while the General they
fought against, and the two armies, had done all they
could to attain it. He added a hort harangue in fa-
vour of his cause, and made a relation of all the pre-
tended injuries he had received. He concluded, by
ordering Afranius to disband his army. " I will not,
" fays he, take from you your soldiers and enlist them,
· as I could easily do, but I will prevent your employ-
" ing them against me. Therefore leave these pro-
"vinces, and disband your forces: in which cafe no
i body fiall have reason to complain of my treatment.

This is my final resolution, and the only condition I
"insist on."

This discourse of Csfar was very agreeable to Afra-
nius's soldiers; who, inifead of being punished, as
they feared, were in ome fort rewarded by the dif-
charge their Conqueror procured them. They plainly
shewed their satisfaction. For, while the place and
rime of their difmifion were debating, they signified
by their gestures and cries, that they desired to be
disbanded immediately. After some discussion of that
article by Caesar and Afranius, it was regulated, that
those who had houses or poifeffions in Spain, who
r:adz near third of the army, should be discharged

onl

n the spot; and the reft near the Var, a little river A. R. o.

t parts Gaul from Italy. Cfar on his fide de- Ant. c
clared, that he would hurt no body, nor force any
one to take on in his service. He even promised to
nd them in corn until they got to the Var. And
latly, he carried his generosity so far, as to restore to
them all they had loft in .the war, that could be known
again; indemnifying himself his own soldiers, who
hereby loft part of their booty. By this condut he
acquired the friendship and confidence of the soldiers
of the other party to such a degree, that from that
time, during the two days that were spent in giving
discharges to those who were to be forthwith dif-
banded, he was the arbiter of all the disputes they had,
either among themselves, or with their Commanders.
These two days expired, those who were to go to the
Var set out in this order. Two of Csfar's legions
marched at the head, the others in the rear, and the
vanquilhed troops in the middle. Q. Fufius Calenus,
one of Cafar's Lieutenants, presided over the march.
When they were come to the prescribed place, Afra-
nius's soldiers were disbanded, their Chiefs and prin-
cipal Officers went away to Pompey, and a great num-
ber of the soldiers entered into fresh engagements with
Cafar, and took on voluntarily in the service of a
General, who knew so well how to conquer, and to
make use of his vi&corv.

This campaign of Cefar, and the proofs he gave
in it of his extraordinary fill in military affairs, and
the art of choofing his ground, have gained the de-
served applause of all ages; and in there latter times,
as I have elsewhere observed, the approbation of the
great Conde has put the feal to this universal admi-
ration. It is not proper for me to dwell on a subject
so much above my knowledge. But the magnani-
mity of his proceedings, that fund of clemency, which
even the injustice and cruelty of his adversaries could
not exhaust; his noble confidence of success, and ge-
nerous refusal to increase his forces, by any other
way than the free content of thoe who lifted under

him;

A.R.703.him; there are virtues, whose worth I am extremely
A. c. fnfible of, and which I am only sorry to fee emn

ployed to so bad a purpose as that of enslaving hi
country.
Cf. deB. Many preing reasons recalled Cefar to Rome,
civy. 7- But Varro, a Lieutenant of Pompey, having under

him two legions and thirty cohorts of auxiliaries, yet
kept Ulterior Spain; and it was a maxim with Cafar,
to think he had done nothing, while any thing re-
mained to be done. He therefore ent there in hatc
Q Caffus, Tribune of the People, with two legions,
whom he presently followed with fix hundred horse.
But he found no employment for these forces. He
had little to do, besides shewing himself, to reduce
that province, which had been long well-affeted to
him; as he had been Qu.effor there, and had after-
wards governed it as Propraetor. So that as soon as
his troops appeared, and it was known that he was
there, the whole country rose in his favour. At the
fame time, one of Varro's legions, which had been
railed in the province, deserted under his eyes, and
Svile, retired to Hifpalis, which town had declared for

Cefar. Pompey's Lieutenant did not attempt a vain
resistance. He delivered the legion that kept with
him to the person Catfar ent to take the command of
it, went himself to him at Corduba, and brought wifE
him what money he had in his hands, and an inventory
of the stores and shipping.

Ce'ar had nothing now to do at Corduba, where,
he had summoned a General Assembly, but to receive)
the fubmifions of the nations, and the congratulations
of all the Roman Knights and Citizens in Beotica.
He rewarded those who had distinguished themselves
Liv. E?:t. in his favour; and the city of Cadiz was honoured,
z:. on that occasion, with the freedom of Rome: on thotf

he was necessitated to punish, he only imposed pecu-
niary mulcts. After which, leaving Q. Caflius, with
four legions, to command in his absence, he em-
barked on Varro's ihips, and landed at Tarragdne,
where he received the deputations of the nations of

alinoft

lmoft all Citerior Spain. From thence he went-byrA. ^R-
land to Narbonne, and thence to his camp before 4,.
Marseille; which was reduced to the last extremity,
and only waited for his coming to surrender.

The Marfeillians had defended themselves with ex- cf. deg.
taordinary courage. They had twice tried their for- c.-i.- .&
tune in a fea-fight; once with their own force, and"' '
afterwards with a reinforcenient of 'seventeen hips,
sent them by Pompey, under the command of L.
Nafidius. They were both times worsted by D. Bru-
tus, Commander of the fall fleet that Cafar had fta-
tioned before their prt. They did not, however,
fail either through want of courage, or kill: and even
might have succeeded in the second ation, had Nai-
dius manifested a resolution equal to theirs. But he
was not equally interested in the defence of Marseille;
and, when the fight grew warm, bore away, and
barely deserted his allies.

That which gave D. Brutus the superiority was the
incredible valour of his soldiers, who had been care-
fully feleted from among the stoutest men of every
legion: and who, grappling with the enemy's hips,
boarded them suddenly, and rendered useless to the
Marfeillians their superior skill in the conftru&ion and
management of their hips. We may recolle& the
story I told elsewhere of a soldier, who, having loft
his right-hand, fought with his left, until the adver-
fary ship was forced and took. The inhabitants of
Marseille had not only suffered by ea, but had been
also vigorously attacked by land. Trebonius, to
whose care Ctfar had entrusted the siege, constru&ed
with infinite labour machines of all forts, made fre-
quent assaults, repulsed all the rallies, and, at last,
after ome months made a breach in the wall. Part
of a tower, being undermined, fell, and the reft of it
was in danger: which, if the Romans demolished,
they opened to themselves a way into the town in spite
of all opposition. In this extremity the besieged threw
themselves on the mercy of the ViEors. They come
out of the gates in crouds in the manner of suppliants,

extend-

A. R. 703. extending their hands towards the Roman camp. At
Ant C. fight of them, the attack ceases; and the Marfeilli-

9 ans advance to the commanding Officers, prostrate

themselves before them, and beg of them to stay for
Cafar's arrival. They acknowledge they can no lon.
ger make any defence; and consequently, that Cefiar
would be always mailer of their fate. They repre-
sent with tears, that, if the remainder of the tower
was thrown down, and the breach thereby enlarged,
it would be impoflible to restrain the ardor of the fol-
diers, and their city would be inevitably pillaged,
lacked, and utterly destroyed. All this was delivered
in an affecting manner, by men, whom necessity
alone would have made eloquent, if they had not
added thereto the knowledge of polite literature,
which had been always cultivated at Marseille with
care and success.

Trebonius had instructions from Caesar agreeable to
what the inhabitants of Marseille desired. That
great man, full of humanity, and love for learning,
in which he himself excelled, thought he hould fully
his glory, by destroying so famous a city, which was
the habitation of the Gaulish muses, and the centre
of Gaulish politeness. He had therefore strongly re-
commended to his Lieutenant not to susser the town
to be flormed, left the exasperated soldiers hould put
to the sword, as they threatened, all who were able
to bear arms. Trebonius followed his orders; yielded
to the intreaties of the suppliants, and consented to a
fort of truce; to the great discontent of his soldiers,
who complained, that they were deprived of the fruit
of their conquest, and hindered from taking a town
that could make no defence.

The truce, as it is usual, was productive of negli-
gence and security. The Romans, forgetting that
ftrit discipline is never more necessary than when an
accommodation with an enemy is on foot, as that is the
time for furprize and treachery, were not at all on
their guard, nor apprehended any danger. So fine
an opportunity tempted the Marfeillians, and made

them

them guilty, if we are to take Caesar's account literally, A. R. 7j
of an inexcusable perfidy. Observing one day, that the Ant.C.
wind was high, and blew full on the Roman machines,
they on a sudden set them on fire; and, the wind
making it impoflible for the besiegers to extinguilh it,
those works were in an instant consumed that had cost
so much time and labour. This advantage rejoiced
the Marfeillians, but was of little real service to them.
The Roman soldiers, animated by revenge, worked
on the reconftrution of these machines with such di-
ligence, that, in a few days, all things were restored
to their pristine condition, and the besieged were re-
duced to a reiteration of their submission and intrea-
ties.

Carfar's narration is imperfec in this place. For
although the thread of the story gives room to believe,
that it was to Trebonius that these fresh supplications
of the Marfeillians were presented; yet he does not
fay so expressly. And indeed, if the soldiers shewed
their indignation at the first truce granted the be-
lieged; how would they, irritated, as they must be,
anew by this horrible treachery, have suffered the
concession of second ? On the other fide, when, as- Cae. de l.
ter an interruption of ome pages, Cafar resumes the vz .
relation of the siege of Marseille, he does not fay nei-
ther, that its inhabitants waited for his coming, to
surrender. He does not fay, that he reproached them,
as was natural, with their infidelity and perjury.
They are received as if they had not forfeited all pre-
tensions to mercy, If to these considerations we add
also his known hatred to those of Marseille, of which
there are evident marks in his Commentaries, and cic. Plaii.
which is also attested by Cicero; may we not be al- '9u
lowed to doubt of what their enemy reports to their 19.
disadvantage; and to clear the inhabitants of that
celebrated city from the opprobrium of a perfidy
equally criminal and senseless in their then circum-
fnces ?

But, if we may fufpet that Cfar's hatred pre-
vailed on him, either to mis-report faAs, or, at least,

VOL. IX. G to

A. R. 7°3 to trust too lightly to the memories of those who con-

AnC. duted the siege in his absence; that hatred, however,
49.

was void of cruelty. He spared the Marfeillians from
bing plundered: he left their walls and edifices
Landing; he did them no hurt in their persons; he
deprived them not of their liberty. But he disarmed
them, seized on all their ships, and took all the money
out of the public Treasury. Domitius Ahenobarbus
escaped by sea, before the surrender of the town;
and went into Greece to join Pompey. Cfar, having
left two legions in Marseille, set out for Italy. Pom.
pey and the Senate in his camp, to reward in what
manner they were able, the fidelity of the Marfeilli.
ans, gave the rights and privileges of a free city to
Phocxa, in Ionia, which was the mother-town of
Marseille.

Wherever Cafar went in person, fortune faithfully
accompanied him ; or rather the superiority of his ge-
nius ever rendered him victorious. His Lieutenants
were not always equally successful; and his party sus.
sered this year two considerable checks; one in Illyri-
cum, and the other in Africa.
L cn. We have but few particulars of that in Illyricum,
'.- I' because Cafar's account of it is loft. We only know,
F or. V.
.. that Dolobella and C. Antonius, who commanded for
A^Sian. him on that coast, were vanquished by M. Ocavius

: a, d s. and Scribonius Libo, Pompey's Lieutenants, who had
I
:. il. a superior naval force; and that C. Antonius was
6;' obliged to surrender himself prisoner with fifteen co-

horts. An exprefiion of Cafar, occasionally, informs
us, that there was treason in the cafe ; and that one of
his bravest Officers, who was probably that Pulfio',
of whom we have related a memorable acion in the
Gaulish war, dishonoured himself here by a base per-
fidy against his General, and occasioned the loss of the
army.

At e.-., there is but the difference of one letter in the name.
I!e is calei T. Pulfo in the 5th book of the Gaulish War; andT.
'uicio i: te 3d book of the Civil War.

On;

One cohort, on the contrary, gave proof of an al- -. R. 703.
most incredible, and unexampled, fidelity. Some Ant c.
troops, who escaped from C. Antonius's defeat, built,
to cross the sea with, three floats, sustained on each
fide by great empty casks, so disposed as to hide the
oars; so that these rafts advanced without hewing
what worked them. In the middle was a tower.
But, among Pompey's marines, were some of the
old pirates, whom he formerly overcame, who were
well-acquainted with all the artifices in use in sea wars.
These fatehed to the rocks, near those places the
rafts were to pass through, twisted chains like nets,
that were covered by the water. Two of the rafts
avoided them; the third was taken in them. In it
were some soldiers of Opitergium, a Venetian city, Oderzo,
beyond the Po. These brave men defended them-
selves till night with invincible courage. But, after
many fruitless efforts to disengage themselves, finding
it impossible to get off, they chore to turn their swords
against one another, and mutually kill themselves to
the last man rather than surrender to the enemy.

The cause of Cefar's loss in Africa was Curio's Cx. de e.
raffnefs. No less audacious in the field, than he had Civ. 1. n.
been in domestic dissensions and his contests with the
Senate; he set out from Sicily, which Cato aban-
doned to him, taking with him but two legions, out
of four that Cafar had appointed him, and five hun-
dred horse. He greatly despised the enemy he was
going against in Africa; and he was not in the wrong.
This was Attius Varus; who, having been drove by
Cefar from Ofimo, in the beginning of the war, fled
direfly into the province of Africa, which he had
governed ome years before as Propritor hoping
that a people, used to obey hiln, would refpe& his
name and orders. He was not mistaken. He fuc-
ceeded in seizing the Government; and raised men
in that country, whom he formed into two legions.
Mean while Tubero, whom the Sertate had appointed
Governor of that province, came to take polefflon
f it. arus, who was ambitious and covetous, paid

G 2 no

A R. 7o.- no deference to the Senate's authority; and, as he was
Ant. C. master of the country and coasts, repulsed Tubero

with such severity, as not even to susser him to set
aflore his son, who was ick. The two Tubero's
were therefore obliged to return in the fame hip that
brought them; and went to Pompey. Such was
Varus; inconsiderate, proud, and of small capacity.

But he had a powerful ally in Juba, King of Mau-
ritania and a part of Numidia. This Prince was the
son of Hiempfal, whose dominions Pompey had for-
merly enlarged, when he warred for Sylla in Africa.
Besides this motive of gratitude which attached Juba
to Pompey's party, he had another, from his personal
hatred to Curio; who, when Tribune of the People,
had proposed a law to confiscate his kingdom, an re-
duce it to the form of a Roman province. This ha-
tred, seconded by a great force, made Juba a formi-
dable enemy to Curio; or, at least, such a one as he
cught to have carefully guarded against, by observing
a circumfpet, prudent, conduc. But this was what
the young warrior was not capable of: naturally pre.
funlptuous, and overset with the success he had at his
first coming.

For he debarked in Africa, without danger or
trouble; and, having encamped near the river Bra-
gada, he began by getting the better in a combat of
cavalry: in consequence of which, he permitted his
soldiers to proclaim him Imperator. He then ad-
vanced nearer to Varus, who was encamped under the
walls of Utica: and, being informed, that a rein-
forcement of Numidians was coming from Juba to
the enemy, he went to meet them with his cavalry,
and was again victorious.

He was not only bold in military actions but feady
also, and wile in Council: and it was well for him,
ronfidering what troops he had under him. They
ere the legions ho had served under Domitius
enobarbus, in Corfinium; and had afterwards en-
d with C?ar. So that it was to be prcfumed,

:~ir a::achi aenr to their new General was not

much

much to be depended on: and, in fa&, the night as- A. R. 703.
ter the last engagement, two Captains and twenty- AntC.
two Soldiers deserted, and went over to Varus. Thele
run-aways reported, that all their comrades were of
the fame mind, and ready to abandon Curio; that all
they wanted was an opportunity, which might be
given them, by bringing the two armies in fight of
one another, so that they might have some conver-
fation together. In this hope, the next day, Varus
drew out his forces, and formed them in battalia, at
the head of his camp. Curio on his fide, did the
fame.

In the army of Attius Varus was Quintilius Varus,
who had been Quaestor to Domitius Ahenobarbus,
with whom having been hut in Corfinium, made
prisoner, and released by Casfar, he afterwards went
into Africa. He was acquainted with the Officers of
Curio's legions, the companions of his misfortune.
He advanced to them, and essayed them by discourse
proper to awaken in them the remembrance of the oath
they formerly took to Domitius. But none of them
seemed much affeced thereby. Yet, when the army
retired, Curio's camp was full of trouble, alarm, sus-
picion, and mistrust.

Curio called a Council of war to deliberate on the
rfate of affairs; and found it divided. Some were
for aflaulting the enemy's camp; pretending, that
nothing was so proper as aion and fighting to drive
such thoughts out of the soldiers heads, which leisure
and idleness bred and entertained. Others, on the
contrary, were for retreating immediately, and setting
out at midnight for a place, which, ever since the
first Scipio Afranius had encamped there, retained
the name of Scipio's Camp: a place naturally strong, Cafra
where they might, at leisure, revive in their soldiers, orn
the sentiments of fidelity and affetion; and from
whence, in cafe of necessity, they might easily return
to Sicily.

G 3 Curio

A. R. -3. *Curio condemned both these opinions; blaming

t. C- one for want, and the other for excess of courage;

since the first advised an ignominious flight, and the
others a ralh attack. His discourse is related by C.
far, probably, after some original memoirs; and, as
Curio was accounted one of the greatest Oratorsof
his age, I fancy I hall please the reader of taste, by
laying before him this harangue, and that he after-
vards made to the soldiers; which are the only pieces
we have of him.

f " What reason," fays he, " have we to hope to
force a camp, which situation and art render im-
" pregnable ? And, what loss may we not sustain, if
' we are repulsed ? Do not you know, that success
" insures to Generals the esteem of their troops and
"that, cn the contrary, disgraces make them con.
" temp ble and odious ? As to changing our camp,
" that is the worst thing we can do. Besides the ig.
" r.omin' of a precipitate flight, and a cowardly de.
' fpair discreditable to our arms, we shall, by that
* Cn:-i^ ,' im.,: ine probanr.s conCilium, quantum alteri sententia!
dee:t:t animi, tat'm a':eri fupereffe dicebat: hos turpifimae fugz
i;ic.::e-'n h:.'erc, iilos iniquo etiam loco dimicandum putare. Cs,
de B Cis. JI. Qi!T.

- t. Q: i',:::i,: :;_:i, fituit-;c, & opcre & ntura loci munitiffima
c2?.-,:': tr-_nari uxi;e I;er.mus' aut ero quid proficimus, si accepto
r- .:o c'ti r:nle;,to :-b o' pugnatioie ca.ftrorumn difcedimus ? quasi nco
,c; s.i];, :s rr;ii s::'..::-.m, exercitus benevolertiam imperatoribus,

r--.er:' c'. onciiieiut. Caftrrur autem inutatio quid habet,
r.;!i t :-re : t.:_ .-, deiprrationem onniurm, & alienationem exer-
cs:-.: N.s . re--^e \i-ad. ite 'u:picari oportet fibi parum credi, neque

--;~' *... r ; :
t-.er: quoid illis licentiam timor augeat nofter, his
s- :':: dI.~. *. ma'. 1t;id ii jam hcc explorata habemus, quae de exer-
c':.; .- c :;-::;;e dSc:!l:r (qu.x quidcm ego aut onino falli, aut
c:.- - r.:::' :: -;'.ine C c clf.d1 ) quanto Licc diffimulare & occul-
t: e. r:-.m i^er nos conrrlri p'iat = An non, uti corporis vulner,
i.: e:\rt:ts iitc'cn;llda 4, nt te'enda, ne f em adverfariis augea-
: : .: e:-..-. ; -:.cii t no'te proficifcnrmur addint: quo majore,
c!t.o. 'icei' .'n l:.'1 t -t q'i peccare co:entu:r. Namque hujufnoJi
rt;. .:ut pUi. , a'it iletil ;t.nr.ll.r quibus rells nox maximeadve-
arbi t: iQt ie ';qiqe 3a't:l Iln a;S:ii., i:: f.pe ecalra oppugnanda
cr. c:-: nl:e ti!:i .ir-i , it ipfe deiciam. Atque omniaprius
eipe e a -r:tr.o:; rnan.:tiue ex parte jam me una vobifcumn d:
r. :di:',.mi fiaiirinn clonsdo.
* r.c - e. r o-cur. I h-ve i:,ien them thit fcnT'e which feeir t
ar. mr:.c- j'r ca:L : ..:*.j:ti¶., C5.

'" tep

" ftep, even alienate the minds of our soldiers. For A. R.703.
t' the well-affeted ought not to know that we diftruit Ant. C.
' them, nor the ill-affe&ed, that we fear them; be-
,, cause our apprehensions will augment the audacity.
"c of the last, and weaken the attachment of the others.
" As for me, I am satisfied, that what we have been
i told of the disaffection of the troops, is either false,
,t or exaggerated. But, supposing it true, ought we
c" to expose ourselves our own weakness ? Ought we
' not, on the contrary, to conceal i.that it may not.
,' give spirits to the enemy ? It is .advised too, to
, march away at midnight; perhaps, that such as
" are ill-difpofed may not want an opportunity of
c, executing their bad designs. For hame and fear,
,' chiefly detain those who want to desert; but night
, will remove this double objection. Upon the
, whole, I own I am not stout enough to attack a

camp, without the least chance for success; and
" yet too flout to be wanting to myself; and there-
, fore am of opinion that we ought to try every thing,

before we comply with either of the schemes pro-
"posed. I hope, experience will soon satisfy you,
" that I think justly on the present occasion."

After Curio had difniffed the Council of war, he
assembled the army; to whom he made a very fine
and dexterous harangue: but I {hall abridge this dif-
course, as it is very long. He begins by displaying,
on one fide, the importance of the service they did.
Cafar, in coming over to him, and etting an ex-
ample that drew in all Italy; and, on the other, the
marks of confidence Cafar had given them. He
adds*, " There are, I am told, those who persuade
"you to abandon us. Equally enemies to us both;
" what can they desire, more than at once to ruin us,
"and make you guilty of the most horrid perjury ?

* Adfunt qui vos hortentur, ut a nobis defcifcatis. Quid enim eft
illis optatius, quam upo tempore & nos circiumvenllre, & vos nefario
fcelere obftlingere? aut quid irati gravius de vobis fentire poflunt,
quam ut eos prodatis, qni fe vobis omnia delere judicant; in eorum
lotetatem veniatis, qui fe per vos perilfe exiltimnant?

G 4 " Their

A.R. 7c3." Their revenge on you will doubtless be satisfied
Ant. C. , if they succeed in persuading you to betray Corn

9' " manders, who own they owe every thing t you;

, and to put yourselves in the power of those whc
" confider you as the authors of their ruin."

He then informs them of Cafar's late glorious vic.
tory in Spain, which he had totally subdued in forty
days; and makes this inference: * Do you think,
" that a party, which could not make head againA
" us with its entire force, can resist us, now that is
" ruined ? And you, who espoused Cefar's cause,
, while success was yet dubious; by what infatuation,
,( now that victory has declared for him, can you go
" over to the vanquished faction, at the very time
" that you should reap the fruits of your services ?"

He speaks with no less emphasis of his own success,
nd of the first advantages gained over Varus; after
which he concludes, in these words: t " It is then
, this gbrious f-rtune, and such Generals as C/efar
' and I, thaCt yu chose to renounce, to embracea
· p-rr- in .-'icI the disgrace at Corfinium, the flight
" cut of Iraly, t-he loss of Spain, the disadvantages
cc alrcady receivcd in the African war, plainly declare
" there is r.ol .ng to be expeced but shame and mif-
"' .trtune. ? s or me, I never took any other title
" than of C-:r's Soldier. You have been pleased so

bi Lcfro.- on r-e that of Imperator. If you repent of
, -.'hat you L -ve dore, tak;e it again; and restore me
" my own; tat it may not be said, that you did me
s honour a -irft, only to disgrace me the more after-
" v''ards.'

This har:ngue had all the effea Curio could de-
ire;. \Vh.i! he was yet speaking, he was often in-
* An qui rcc'rimes refiftere non potuerunt, perditi refiltant ? Vat
au:;.-n ;nct-:x; i.'or:a C'srrem fecuti, dijudicata jam belli fortuna,
;trum iequiir.ini, quim xefiri officii pramia percipere debeatis?
t Hac 'o rcrtunl atqne his ducibus repudiatis, Corfinienfem ig-
normiriam, -in Italise furgam, an Hilpaniarum deditionem, an Africl
!eii Fir.':ud cia !iquirni:i Equidem me Cafearis militerm dic volui.
Vo5 nme I.-rrator-s .o;:;.ne appellarifis. Cujus si vos panitet, vef-
!r-,n vcbis benenicinm remitto: mihi meum r:fftitoito nomen, ne ad
or';umciiam .Lcr.rem dedle videaini.

terrupte4l

errupted by the clamours of the soldiery, who bore AiAt.7
very impatiently the suspicion of disloyalty: and, 4.
when he had concluded, they all exhorted him to
take courage, and not be afraid to engage the enemy,
but to put them to the proof. Curio, well pleased
with the success of his resolution and eloquence, of-
sered battle the next day, and the enemy, thinking
it improper to decline it, came also out of his camp.

Between the two armies was a valley, the descent
into which was very sleep. Varus having lent into
this valley his cavalry and great part of his light-
armed troops, Curio also detached his cavalry and
two cohorts, whose first hock put the enemy's
horse to flight; so that their light-armed troops were
cut to pieces in Varus's fight, without receiving any
assistance from him, and without being able to make
any resistance.

Curius had brought with him out of Sicily Caninius
Rebilus, a Lieutenant of Cafar, of great experience
in military affairs. This old Officer comes up to
him; " The enemy, fays he, is intimidated, make the

proper advantage of it." Curio immediately puts
himself at the head of his legions, and goes to the
attack by of difficult and steep a way, that the
first ranks could not get up without the assistance of
those behind. Varus's army, initead of making use
of their advantageous situation, is panic-ftruck, dif-
ordered, and put to flight nobody aims at more than
regaining the camp.

In this flight Varus had a narrow escape. For,
hearing somebody call frequently after him, he fop.
ped; thinking it was one of his people, who had some-
thing to fay to him. But the person that called him,
who was a Captain in the other army (named Fabius)
immediately levelled a blow with his sword at his
shoulder, which Varus hadjuft time to parry with his
buckler. Fabius was killed on the spot by those
about him.

He was the only man Curio lft in this engage-
ment, On Varus's fide Csafar's Commentaries reckon

fix

A.R 703. fix hundred slain, and a thousand wounded. And
Ant. C.

t. great was the fright of there troops, that, of thoj

who perished, more were stifled at the gates of th
camp, than put to the sword by the enemy. The fam
panic followed them into their intrenchments, thougi
Curio had retired: and as, the wounded being to b
sent into Utica, many counterfeited hurts for a pre
tence to go there; Varus found himself necessitated t(
retire into the town with his whole army, and abandor
the camp. The next day Curio fat down before the
city.

Utica was a trading town, which had for a long
time seen nothing of war. The inhabitants, who had
many obligations to Cfar, were entirely devoted to
him. The Roman citizens, who were very numerous,
had various interests and different ways of thinking.
The terror was universal in consequence of the late ill
success. And a surrender was publickly talked of,
and Varus was importuned not to hazard every thing
by his obstinacy. But this disposition was changed by
the arrival of a courier from Juba, with advice that he
was coming with a great force to the succour of Varus
and Utica.

Curio had also such intelligence. But elate with
success, and the prosperity of Cxfar's arms in Spain,
he knew not how to believe that the King of Mauri-
tania durst come and attack him. Yet he could not
but give credit to it at last, when Juba was advanced
within twenty-five miles of Utica. He then prui
dently retreated to the camp of Scipio, that I have
took notice of. This place was very advantageous,
and could command all forts of conveniencies; wood,
corn, water, salt, every thing, was within reach; and
the vicinity of the ea gave him an opportunity of
being easily joined by the two legions he left in Si-
cily, which he sent for on this occasion. He deter-
mined then to take the advantage of this post, and
to protract the war.

But he was not naturally prudent, and could not
persevere in that wile relbiution, Having received a

piec I

I

iece of false intelligence by some deserters from the A. R. 701.
own; who, suborned, perhaps, by the enemy, told AnCt:
him that Juba had been obliged to return to defend +9'
his frontiers against some of his neighbours; and had
left but a small force with Sabura his General, who
was to go to Utica in his flead Curio resumed his
first plan, and formed the vain, rah, design of going
to meet the Numidians, and giving them battle.

What gave some colour to the false report that de-
ceived him, was, that Sabura had advanced with a
detachment, that was not very considerable, to the
river Bragada; but the King followed him with the
reft of the army at fix miles distance. Curio, as oon
as it was night, sent his cavalry to insult Sabura's
camp. His horse easily put the Numidians into con-
fusion, who knew not how to fortify a camp; flew
many of them, and returned with some prisoners to
their General.

Curio had marched with the greatest part of hi;
forces three hours before day, and had advanced fix
miles when he met his cavalry. He inquires of the
prilbners, who commanded in their camp. They tell
him Sabura. On receiving this answer, without fur-
ther examination, without entering into particulars,
he takes the information of the prisoners for a full
confirmatlon of the intelligence of the deserters from
Utica. He communicates it to his army, and exhorts
them to haften, nor to a fight, but to a vi&ory. The
ardour of his troops equalled his own. Thus he con-
tinued his march precipitately, ordering his cavalry to
follow him. But that was in no condition to obey him,
being greatly fatigued, with having marched, or
fought, all night: the troopers, on their way, ltop-
ped some in one place, some in another; and only
two hundred of them were able to keep up with the
infantry. The Numidians hewed as much prudence,
as the Romans impetuosity. Sabura immediately gave
notice to his matter of the night-engagement; and
Juba, not doubting but Curio would presently come
up to complete the vicory began by his cavalry, sent

to

A. R.70s. to his General two thousand Spanifi and Gaulish hori
Ant. of his guard, and a felet: body of infantry. He him

felfprepared to follow them, but more lowly, wit
the reft of his army and forty elephants.

Sabura, feeing Curio approach, formed his troop
in order of battle; and advanced a detachment to
wards the enemy, as it were to skirmish; with order
to run away, and hew all the signs of terror ant
fright. Curio suffered lhimfelf to be deceived by thi!
common artifice. He quitted the eminences le wa,
on, and descended into the plain ; made more confi-
dent than ever by the flight of the Numidians, not
confidering that he was going to engage with infantry,
that were fatigued by a march of sixteen miles, and
were unsupported by cavalry.

The Numidian General took advantage of his ad-
verfary's imprudence. As he knew his infantry was
no match for that of the Romans, he did not susser it
to engage, but kept it in gocd order at some dif.
tance. His cavalry was good and numerous; with
that he ated; ordering it to extend itself, and fur.
round the legions. This order was well executed,
and procured him the victory, spite of all the efforts
of the Romans. Their two hundred horse did won-
ders wherever they charged ; but their weariness hin-
dered them from pursuing those they broke. The
infantry, who kept their ground, were ruined. If any
cohort advanced out of the line, the aive, alert, ene-
my dispersed, and, having took a circuit, returned to
the attack on another fide. Thus, all the loss fell on
the Romans ; and the Numidians, on the contrary,
were continually reinforced from Juba's army, which
was not far off. Curio was now sensible of his error,
and endeavoured to regain the eminences. But Sa.
bura's cavalry prevented him, and deprived him of
that last resource.

Affairs being desperate, Cn. Domitius, General of
the horse, thought at least he ought to save the Ge-
reral. He comes to Curio, and proposes to him to
retire into the c-p, vwhere were five cohorts, pro-

mifing

iing not to leave him. " No, fays Curio, I will A.R.Y a.
never appear before Ciefar, fter having loft the A n
army he intrudied me with."' He continued there-
ore to fight, until slain by the enemy. All the foot
re cut to pieces to a man. Of the two hundred
orfe, who were in the ation, very few escaped.
hose that ltopped on the way returned to the camp.
The Quftor, M. Rufus, had staid there, and en-
eavoured to revive the drooping courage of the fol-
iers. They demanded clamorously to be carried
ack into Sicily. He was forced to promise it, and
o prepare for the embarkation. But such was the
error by ea and land, that nothing could be done
ith order and tranquillity, so that few of them em-
arked and got to Sicily. The reft, a great majority,
ent their Captains to Varus, and surrendered, on a
promise of their lives. Juba, who came foon.after to
Utica, did not think himself bound by the word of
the Roman General; and, spite of all representations,
inhumanly butchered most of those who had furren-
dered, and sent the reft prisoners into his dominions.

Thus totally perished that unfortunate army, by
the bad conduct of its General: who made himself an
end suitable to his mifconduf, but unworthy of his
parts. Descended from an illustrious house, born with
a sublime genius and generous courage; he might,
by honourable steps, have attained to the highest pre-
ferments. But being debauched in his youth, and
extravagantly ambitious, when old enough to hare in
the administration of affairs; being observant of no
rules but his passions, nor duty but his interest, and
disregardful of all laws and manners; he only served
to hew by his example, that the greatest gifts of na-
ture become useless, and even fatal, to those who join
not with them wisdom and moderation. His memory
was so odious, that the antient Commentator on Vir-
gil has applied to him this verse, which is in the enu-
meration of the flagitious dead that are punished in
Tarrarus: Vendidit ie auro patriam, dominumque pt-
it; n iapofitt. " This man fold his Country, and

brought
2

AL R. 7-. brought in an imperious Tyrant." I do not fay tha
At. the Poet had him in his thoughts, but the C6opmen.

tator's remark shews what was the general opinion
concerning Curio. Celius will give soon a fimila
example.

Juba was arrogant even to insolence. This appean
by the little regard he hewed to the composition
granted by Varus to Curio's soldiers. He behaved
in the fame manner in every thing else. Utica was a
city of the Roman Empire. He acted, notwithftand-
ing, there as master, while he staid; and gave such
orders, and made such regulations, as he thought pro-
per; after which he returned into his kingdom. Africa
from this time continued quiet, until some of the re.
mains of the Pharfalian rout, having got together
again there, railed fresh troubles.

THE

[ 95 ]
THE
ROMAN HISTORY.

BOOK THE FORTY-FOURTH.
CE S A R's firfl Ditatorfhip, and second

Consulship. He goes into Greece to war
with Pompey. Battle of Pharfalia. Flight,
and death, of Pompey. Years of Rome 703,
704.

SECT. I.
Cdfar named DiScator by Lepidus, Prxetor of the city.

Cefar's ninth legion mutinies. His resolute, haughty,
behaviour, by which he makes the mutineers return to
their duty. Pride and indecency of Anthony's condtuS.
Cdfar comes to Rome, takes pojeion of the Ditator-
flip, causes himself to be elected Consul, and presides at
the eletion of the other viagi rates. Regulation in
favour of debtors. Recall of exiles. The children of
proscribed perons reflored to the capacity of serving
public offces. Motions of Celius and Milo. Their death.
Pompey's preparations; his land-army. Pompey en-
curages military exercises by his own example. Ge-
neral zeal and affetion for Pompey's cause. Ajefmbly
of the Senate held by the Cofuls at Thefalonica. Pom-

pey

pey declaredole Chief. Pompey's security as to Cefar,
pafage into Greece. Cefar's eagerness to get there
He goes ito Greece witb twety toufand klgionar
fodiers, and fJ: hundred horse. He dispatches Vibulli
to Pompey, with propo/als for an accommodation.
makes himss master of almost all Epirus. Pompg
ctm:s up time enough to save Dyrracbium, and encamps
av:r-aginl is advirfary, with the river 4sus b.
tween tben. Pcmpey's fleet inderi the troops Cef4r hba
left in taly from crofing the ea. Bibulus's deatb,
Pompy's barjo answer to ibullius. New advances
cf Cafar, always rejeted. Cefar's forces at Brendo.
fium are dilatory in joining him. He goes bimfelf to
fetch thbm. Plamous fpeecb of Cfar to the master of
the bark. Ardour of Cpear's soldiers. On.receiving
new orders, Antony paoes from Italy into Greece witb
fvrr l-gions. Metellis Sipo brings to Pompey tb
Syrian gions. Tyrannical behaviour of that Pronsl.
Cejarfnds three detachments from his army into tclia,
Thelalia, and Macedonia. Pompey avoids an engage.
ment. Cefar attempts to inclose Pcmpey in lines. Di-
vers aions about the lines. Prodigious valour of ce
of Car's cohorts, and above all of the Centurion
Ecva. Ir:credible patience of Cefar's troops, when in
wart. Fruidlefs negotiation began by Cefar with
Scipio. Ponpey's amy fuftrs mucb. Two Gauli
Officers of Cefar's party aefert, and acquaint Pn.
pfy with tbt ueak parts of his adversary's lines. Pen-
pry forces Cefar's lines. Ccfar determines to retreat
into f kefalia. Shame and grief of hisjoldiers. Pomlp;,
advised to go ver t Ita.y, coofes to flay in Greece.
Coforjcins Calvinius. His various difpofiiitns accord.
ing to the dferent dfgns Pompey might form. Cf/ar
floras the city f Gampbi in The/Jalia. He spares
tsat cf Metropclis. le ccmes to Pbarfalia. Pwpq
fClFIws bhim.

CJESAR

AESAR was informed at Marseille that he hadA. R. 7..
been appointed Di&ator. This nomination was Ant. C.
holly irregular. Supposing an occasion for one, itcef. de
ould only be done by the Consuls, who were ac- B- Civ.
ally in Pompey's camp. Lepidus was bold enough ,'pltom
usurp this important funtion of the supreme Ma- & Cal:
iftrates; and, by virtue of an ordinance of the Peo- .pian."
le, a Prxtor (by an unexampled attempt) nominated Do, i.4.
Dicator. Caesar, who was no formalist, was not
fended at the irregularity of his nomination. He
anted some title, and set out for Rome, to take
ffeffion of the Dictatorihip, when a more pressing
fair constrained him to turn off to Placentia.
The ninth legion, which he had sent with the others S:let. ca.
nto Italy before him, when arrived at Placentia, pp69
utinied, and demanded its dififlion. The pre-Dio.
ence for this sedition was, that they were worn out
y labour, and deserved to have at last some reft.
he true reason was, that, instead of enjoying the
icence they promised themselves, Cfar made them
bferve ftri discipline, and would not susser them to
lunder. * " By what caprice, fay they in Lucan,
hile we are compelled to commit the greatest of all
rimes, that of invading our native Country, must we
examples of virtue, by the poverty we are forced
o be content with." Add, that he, who has made
imfelf the head of a faction, has never so much com-
and over his troops as a lawful General. The fame
ucan puts in the mouth of there mutineers this re-
eftion: t " Cafar, fay they, was our General on
he Rhine; but here he is our Accomplice. The
crime, that is common to us all, ought to equal us
al." Full of these notions, and sensible of the want
* Imus in omne nefas, mnibus ferroque nocerites,
Paupertate pii. Luc. v. z7o.
'-- Rheni mihi Caesar in undis
Dux erat, hic focius facinus quos inquinat, quit.

V. 89, z.
Vol. IX. H Ca:far

A,.R. -;. Cfar was in of their valour, they made no doubt
.3'. . obtaining all they durst demand.

They were much mistaken. Caesar, indulgent
his soldiers in every other matter, never forgave
breach of obedience; and being satisfied that his pe.
fence would over-awe them, and that there was no
other way to intimidate a mob, but to hew thathe
did not fear it, he went to them; though their fq
teemed capable of the greatest excesses, even to'th
endangering his person. He took, however, the pre.
caution to be accompanied by some troops; and, hay.
ing assembled the mutineers, treated them with tk
utmost contempt. He told them, that, fincethey
demanded their dismission, they should have it; tha
he had no occasion for their service, and that he should
never want soldiers to mhare his prosperity and tri
urmrhs. But he added, that, before he disbanded
tien, he hould punish their crime, and mhould dec
mate the legion.

This stile of authority, and menace, annihilated
the fierccr.es of the mutineers. They threw them
:r!ves a: his feet, begging pardon with tears andla
;.,L.c'.Gns. Cxiar, finding them submissive, abated
oelev:'h:t of his verity ; but would not, however,
ie. ti;:ir ,edition go wholly unpunished. He ordered
;-r.; :'j deliver up to him an hundred and twentyo
te m gusil:I', of whom twelve were appointed by
Ic _ r
t excuction. The officers, in concert with him,
:;.a;-ec 1, t tt the lots fell on those who had been
::c;: iiii.:r;.. There was, however, among the twelve
.* : i.ijocc-nt :cL;.ir, who proved himself absent when

i, ;-^en muinred. Csfar did him juRice, and put
.:,il 'i CC t,! C Captain who had informed agailn,

;A. "Ti legion vas not quit for the punifhmnento
*:.... t..l-e ofenders. Cxefar had a mind to break

i:. rTh ;ilieri were obliged to renew their intrea-
-:s, ,:'-.:s, ard tears, to obtain of him leave to
c.:.:j:e in his tfrc.ice.

I ;--vr:. i h^e been well had he exa&ed modefi'
a:;.;. -'-' bel.-icutr from his friends, with he si r

ftrictr'

irijtnefs as he exacted obedience from his soldiers. A.R. 703.
But he punilhed sedition severely, because it endan- An C
gered the very foundation of his power and fortune,
and he overlooked the disorders of such as were ser-
viceable to him. Nothing can exceed the pride and Cic. ad
indecency of the proceedings of Anthony, to whom pti x &
Cafar left the Government of Italy when he set out s5. Plin.
for Spain. - ii. '.

Anthony travelled over the whole country, from Pu- An
Brundisium to Rome, in a car drawn by lions.
After him came in an open litter the aress Cytheris.
The Magifrates and most reputable Citizens of the
municipal towns, that lay in his route, were obliged
to go and meet Anthony, and pay their court to his
a&ress. Nor were they always admitted when they
presented themselves, for he often made them wait
until he had sept off his wine, *" Behold, fays
Cicero, on this fubje& in a letter to Atticus, what
Ihame attends our ruin, and to what unworthy vicors
we submit!"
Caesar, having quelled, in the manner I have rclat- c. de
ed, the sedition at Placentia, ordered all his troops B. Cv. 3.
to march towards Brundisium, from whence he in-
tended to transport them to Greece; and went him-
self to Rome, to take possession of the Ditatorillip.
Though he had caused himself to be appointed Dic-
tator, which Magistrate had regal power, he did not
propose to keep that place yet. But it was necessary
to him at that time, either in order to make divers re-
gulations agreeable to his interest, or for the particu-
lar purpose of making himself Consul, and prefidlng
at the clctions of the other MIagiftrates. He began
by filling the vacant employmenrts; and in an AfRcrn-
blyof the People, at which he presided as DiEtator,
was himself appointed Consul for the following year.
He takes care to remark in his Commentaries, like
aftric observer of the law;, that he was then capable
ofa second Confulihip, the interval often years being

Vide quam turpi leto pereamus. Cc. ad Att. x. zo.

H 2 expired.

A. R 7c3 expired. This is a verbal homage he paid t

4. duty, which his aions continually violated.
Dio. gave himself for Collegue Servilius Ifauricus, whq
nut. Cf. obtained this dignity balely. For Pifo, though C~ari

father-in-law, having exhorted him to fend Deputies
to Pompey to treat of an accommodation; Ifauricu
opposed the notion, and was rewarded with the Con.
fuuhip. This alone may prove to the most dim.
lighted, that all the advances Cefar seemed to make
to a peace were insincere. The Didator afterwards
appointed the Prators, the most remarkable of whom
were Caelius and Trebonius; the Ediles, Curules,
and the Quaestors.
Cr. Dio. Many expected from him a general abolition of

debts; or, which is the fame thing, a permiflion for
all debtors to become bankrupts. This was what well
agreed with the circumstances of many of his parti
zans. But he did not think proper to proceed so far,
nor would absolutely sap the foundation of credit,
which is the cement of all human society. He took
a middle course, and ordered, that arbiters hould be
chore, who should make an estimate of the poffefions
of all debtors, and should convey them in payment to
their creditors at the price they bore before the war.
By this regulation the creditors loft about a fourth of
their due. Dio adds, that, as many were fufpeted
of concealing their money to avoid payment, Cfar
made an ordinance, forbidding any body to keep by
him above * sixty thousand sesterces. But the autho
rity of this Historian is not sufficient to convince me
of a faR of this fort, about which all other authors
are silent.

The restoration of the exiles had been long expe&.
ed. Cfar at length put it into execution in this firl
Dic&atorihip. He palliates as much as possible in his
Commentaries this odious measure, which annihilated
paftjudgments, and indicated a total overthrow ofthe
State. But he increased his strength thereby, and by

*Between four and five hundred pounds.

this

is extraordinary benefit fixed in his party many per- A.. 7osi
ns of diftin&ion, who had it in their power to be Ant. c
ry serviceable to him. Milo alone was excepted
t of this general amnesty.
Casfar merited less blame in exempting the children
f the proscribed persons from the punishment im-
fed by Sylla. By opening to them the door to
blic employments, which the murtherer of their
hers had shut against them, he did but follow his
nfant system of politics, which was dire&ly op-
site to that of Sylla: and he put an end to a no-
rious injustice, which nothing but a particular con-
u&ure and the public quiet could have made sup-
ortable.
All this burinefs was done in.eleven days; at the
nd of which Cefar abdicated the Diatatorlhip; and
mmediately set out for Brundisium, in order to pass
rn thence into Greece. But, before I attend him
ere, I shall relate by anticipation some commo-
ions that happened in Italy during his absence; and
hich, though inconsiderable in themselves, are inter-
ing on account of their authors.
Calius, who was so warm at firRf in Cafar's cause, cat. de
and who wrote so pathetically to Cicero to diffiuade B.Civ. 11.
him from joining Pompey, altered on a sudden his Dio 1. 4.
way of thinking. Full of ambition, and the prefump-
tion which great parts give to a fiery young man, he
took heinously that Cafar ihould give Trebonius the
Pretorfhip of the City, which was that of the greatest
dignity, without fubjeding him to draw lots for it.
This preference was enough to detach him from a
arty wherein he thought himself delpifed.
Aiming therefore at raising diffurbances at Rome,
e took under his protetion the cause of the debtors;
in which he was personally concerned. For, * though
there were folly and rashness enough in his proje&Es,
et was there more disorder in his private affairs. As
Trebonius regulated the judgments he gave in this

Pejor illj rcs familiaris, quam mens erat, VL. II. 68.

H
1 affairs

.-R. 7. affair, by the law lately passed by Cafar, Caliu
An. c. placed his Tribunal close by that of the Prator of

the city, and declared, that he would receive the
appeals of those who hould think themselves aggriev.
ed by him. But Trebonius's prudence and mildnef
were such, that no-body appealed from him. Thus
this first attempt of Calius proved unsuccessful. This
did not, however, discourage him; and being deter.
mined to keep no measures, since he could by no other
means infame and stir up the People, he proposed
two noft uniuft and seditious laws; the one, to ex-
erDmp all the tenants in Rome from paying rent; the
ct'.er, for a eneral abolition of debts. This bait
t.k -with the multitude; and Celius, at their head,
ca.-..e nr.d attacked Trebonius on his Tribunal, drove
' :i ;ir.ce, and wounded some about him.

--:, doubtless, in these circumstances that he
.-.. Cro a letter, in a very different flile from his
precing ones. In it he appears extremely concern-
c, :ht he did not go with him to Pompey's camp.
I3 ter-in ihevs contempt and horror for those with
v. -.c he h-.d united. * " I had rather, fays he,
*-ei? , than ie such people. Every body hates us

er ., il ere is no order of men, no, nor a single man,
tk.; is not a 'eil-wilher to your cause. And, was
tc-r r. t nome .pprehenfion of severity from your
p?-.;, v': had been lng ago drove out of Rome."
He, n ccrn.ic r.ence, invites Pompey to fend troops
ir.to I.i-.. '" Your party, fays he to Cicero, is
an'S'", r.nd does not lee our weakness, and where we
are expoed. You hazard a battle, in which you are
to blal:e. I do rot know your troops; butI know

C--'- 7ri'; ;ii Ser rs rtius eft, quam bos videre. Qgod si timnor
'... cr;;_..;:aI:- :cn civet, ejuti jampridem hinc e emus. Nam
t '- .u.
. .... '.;-C I.uI::c, nec ordo quifquam elt, nifi Pompeianus.
C_.m a' Ci. I-.

t V\'- .".c. .cc dl'uc mihi videmini intelligere, quam no;
r- .. . -. c r s'; fn-.us irnbecilli. .... Quid iftic facitis? Prablium

-:- ---:. qcd .!:,.-:urn eft. Veftras copias non novi. Nori
vi -e c. .r.a2, t fa;i.e lgere .& efurire confuerunt, Idem, ibid.

that

that ours can fight well, and well fuflain hunger and A.-R. 73.

cold." Ant. C.
cold."

The expedient Celius proposed was very diffant,
very uncertain; nor had he time given him to wait
for it. Servilius Ifauricus, who, as Consul, had the
supreme authority in the city; having ent for ome
troops, made a Senatufconfultum, which interdited
to Calius the funtions of his office. And, in con-
sequence of it, he caused the bills of the laws of that
Pretor to be tore down; refused him admittance into
the Senate; and drove him out of his Tribunal, whence
he was going to harangue the People. Clius resist-
ed, for a while, being supported by his own obstinacy,
and some factious people.
I would not mention here a face, ill-fuiting the
gravity of an Historian, did it not set in a strong light
the pertinacious, insulting, turn of that Orator. The Q.intil.
Consul having broke to pieces his chair of office, he VI. 3'
provided himself with another; which he garnished
with straps of leather, to reproach his enemy with
having been formerly whipped by his father. This
sorry jest was of no service to him. He was at length
obliged to give way to right and force; and desired
permission to quit Rome, pretending to go and justify
himself to Cafar, who was then in Thessaly. But he
had no such intention. He wanted to go and join
M1ilo, who, in concert with him, was atually scour-
ing about Italy, and labouring to excite new com-
motions.
The motive that animated Milo was anger, to find
himself alone continued in banihment by Caesar, when
all other exiles had been recailed. As he was an old
fiend of Calius, and they were both (though for
ciPferent reasons) discontented with Caesar, they easily
afrociated. And Milo had some beginnings of mili-
tary force in the remains of the gladiators, which he
bought formerly to entertain the People with in the

whews he gave them.
These two men, equally audacious and enterprizing,
ight, if they could have joined, have given some

H 4 trou-

^.R. 3. trouble to CEfar's friends in Italy. But Milo's deatd

.^C. quite disconcerted their projects. He had-alreadyot

about him a number of vagabonds, wretches, and
saves, whose chains he had broke. With this band
having undertook to besiege Compfa*, in the coun-
try of the Hirpinii, he was slain by a stone from a
machine on the walls. Calius did not long survive
him, but was killed also near Thurium t, by some
of Cfar's Spanish and Gaulish troopers, whom he
attempted to debauch and get on his fide, by pro.
mises of money.

Milo and Caelius do not appear to have been h.
mented by any body, though they had both great
parts. Milo was the most courageous of men, but
his valour degenerated into audacity and temerity. It
is a singularity not at all to his credit, that he hould
be at once rejeted by the two parties that then di.
vided the Republic; and that, when he was banihed
Rome by Pompey, he hould not be entertained by
Cafar.

As to Calius, he advanced much the glory of elo
quence, and is reckoned (as well as Curio) among
those Orators who are the ornament of a learned age.
His letters to Cicero abound with wit, and unite
gaiety and humour with force and elevation. But
great vices dishonoured these so inestimable talents.
He was prodigal, debauched, without principles,
without conduct, ready to sacrifice honour and virtue
to his advancement, and his advancement itself to his
refentmenr. For he was extravagantly choleric, so as
to be insupportable in company. : Of this Seneca
has preserved an extraordinary instance. Calius
fupped one night with a client, who was a most pa.

* Conza in the kingdom of Naples.
t- Th- ar.ciCrt Sybaris, a maritime city on the gulf of Tarento.
- Cyit m Oratorem fiffe iracundiffimum conIat. Cum qo, ut
aiunt, ccnabat in cubiculo leetae patientia cliens: fed dliffile rat
i!:; :;, ..riiam conicto rixam ejus cum quo harebat effugere. Op.
tin;n:: j:.:ca it, quidquid dixiffet fequi, & fecundas agere. Non
tui:- Ci-.i s .ffentientem, fed exclamavlt; " Dic aquid ctn, ut
ridu Linus." ShS. de ra, 111. .

ient,
C
..

ient, meek, man. This person, wellacquainted with A.R.o L
the temper of his patron, approved of and applauded Ant.C
all he said. Celius grew hereupon impatient to find
no matter for disputation, and cried out passionately to
this eternal approver, " For once fay no, that we
i' may differ."

The infurreftion- and death of Milo and Caeliuscr.
are fats that happened under Caesar's second Consul-
ihip. There yet remains of the Consulship of Lentu-
lus and Marcellus the military preparations made by
Pompey. These were great indeed; for he had made
a proper use of the time given him by Cefar's Spanish
expedition. Besides the five legions that he had
transported with himself from Italy, another had been
sent him from Sicily; and he had raised three in
Crete, Macedonia, and Asia, re-afiembling all the
veterans he could, who had been fettled in those
countries by former Generals. He expeCted also two
leeions that Metellus Scipio was to bring out of
Syria.

As for auxiliary forces, all the Kings and Nations
of Greece and the East had furniihed him with ar-
chers, lingers, and cavalry. This foreign cavalry, of
various nations, amounted to three thousand fix hun-
dred men. Some of the corps, of which it was com-
posed, were commanded by their Kings, in person;
the mos eminent among whom was old Dejotarus,
whom zeal and affection for Pompey brought there,
at the head of fix hundred horse. The provisions,
ammunition, and money, were proportionable to the
greatness of this force. But, above all, Pompey had
took care to provide a formidable fleet. He had col-
lected ships from Asia and the Cyclades, from Cor-
cyra, Athens, Pontus, Bithynia, Syria, Cilicia, Phoe-
nicia, and Egypt. * It was in his marine, that he,
after the example of Themistocles, placed his hopes
of victory; satisfied, that he, who was mater at ea,.

Pompeii omne confilium Themiftocleum eft. Exiftimat enim,
qui mare teneat, eum neceffe rerum potiri. Cic. ad Btt. X. 8.

would

A. R. 7-;. would necessarily give the law. This fleet was stationed
Ant. C. along the coast of Epirus and Illyricum, under differ.

ent Commanders, who were all subordinate to Bibulus,
as Admiral.
=t. Cat. Pompey had, at first, designed this important

Command for Cato, and had promied him it. But
he relected afterwards, or his friends made him re-
fiect, that he would thereby give too much power to
that rigid Republican, whose sole view was to main.
tain the old Government: that, as soon as Cafar was
vanquished, Cato would be for Pompey's laying down
his arms; and that he would be in a condition to
compel him to it, when at the head of a fleet of above
five hundred nips. This refletion struck Pompey,
whole defgns were not quite to honest as Cato's, and
determined him to constitute Bibulus Admiral. He
could not have pitched on a man worfe-affeded to
Caesar, but 'ic could caflv have chose an abler Com-
mander.

1- : t-.- k care to e::erci:e himself his land-
'. re. .. -Ie did more, e l:ct them an example; and,
tI:o.gih !-:- was near sixty years old, he entered the
.t,:. cth on foot and hor-eback, and was the first
to ie~ : hand to all mlitar-y works. This behaviour

dac_ = :m
i c-xtremely popular. It charmed the fol-
di:rs, an;d miade them confident, to fee Pompey per-
i :m 's exercies a a outr man, draw and return
Ih-. l.vcid n horlfback at fu.i speed, and lance aja-
;cn, ret only w-ith Pkill, but with a vigour that few
in : ir priime could furpas.

.':.rn time the year was near expiring; and the
Cc.li.;, .ho i.ad lent their names and ministry to
al t.Lt had been hitherto done, had a mind, before
ticy were out of office, to give as regular a form as
cir..clr;iances would allow to the adminifsration of
a i. s. They had about them the flower of the Se-
nate, o the number of more than two hundred;
Wvhic cin:lequently might well represent that august
AfTer.ably. The general opinion, that Pompey's cause
'.a tha of ti State ard Liberty, had united with

him

him even those w- :'y, particular reasons to ihunA.R.70o3
him. Brutus, whose iathe' he had killed, and who, A.. 9.
for that reason, would never before take any notice Plut.
of, or fee him, came now to pay his refpets, and Pmp.
submit to him, as head of the defenders of the Re- & Br
public. A Senator, called by Plutarch Sex. Tidius,
who was very old and lame, crossed the ea also to
get to Pompey's camp. When he arrived, several
laughed at him; but Pompey got up, and received
him with great civility; judging rightly, that he did
much honour to his cause, in overcoming the obfta-
ces of age and infirmity, and in exposing himself to
dangers with him, when he might have continued in
Italy in safety.

This general affecion to Pompey was much
strengthened by his coming to a resolution, upon
Cato's representation, not to kill any Roman in cold
blood, and not to plunder any city in friendship or
alliance with the Roman Empire. Every body was
so charmed to find moderation and mildness added to
thejuftice of the cause, that even those, who could
not hare in the war by actual service, did what they
could by prayers and vows; and they were confidered
as enemies to Gods and Men, who did not wish Pom-
pey success.

The Consuls assembled the Senate in the city of Lucan,l.v.
Theffalonica; where, for ftriter observation of the Appian.
laws and customs, they had consecrated a place with
augural ceremonies. For it was only in a place so
prepared, that the Senate could regularly make de-
crees. Lentulus spoke first, and proposed, that it
should be declared, that the Assembly, then aually
fitting at Theffalonica, was the true Roman Senate.
He added, that, nevertheless, as it was impossible for
them to appoint Magistrates, it would be proper to
order, that the Commands of all then in power should
be continued; and that those who were then Consuls,
Praetors, and Quxftors, hould keep their authority,
and exercise their functions, by the names of Pro-
consuls, Proprxtors, and Proquaftors. Lastly, he

repre-

A. . 3 represented, that the posture of affairs required a fin

.c' gle Head; and that nobody could dispute that ho.

nour with Pompey. Every one applauded this pro.
pofal; and a decree pafled accordingly. Thus Por-
pey obtained alone the supreme authority, which till
then he had shared nominally at least, with the Con.
fuls. This Senate also decreed honours and thanks
to the Kings and Nations that favoured their cause.
And in particular young Ptolomy, King of Egypt,
under whole name, and by whole authority, Pompey
was soon after murthered, had the pofleflion of his
Crown confirmed by this Assembly, in exclusion of his
sifter, the famous Cleopatra; though he had a right
to it by the will of Ptolomy Auletes, their common
father, who left his Crown to his eldest son and eldest
daughter, jointly.

I said, that the year was almost expired; but, in
reality, it was only the beginning of autumn, when all
this happened. For it is to be observed, that, as the
civil year of the Romans was then in great confusion,
they reckoned that the end of December, which was
really only the beginning of October. It was there-
cZ, fore yet pracicable to keep the field; but Pompey

was going to distribute his troops among the mari-
time cities of Epirus, while his fleet was to guard
the whole coast, and prevent Cefar's passage. How-
ever, neither he, nor Bibulus, thought themselves un-
der a necessity of being very watchful yet; imagining
they had before them great part of the autumn and
all the winter, nor thinking that Cafar could have
any intention to come over before the return of the
fine weather. This was being very ill-acquainted with
Cafar, and having little attended to the many proofs
he had given of his prodigious acivity. He was so
eager to pass into Greece, that he would not even tfay
at Rome till the first of January, to take poifeflion of
the Confulhip; but set out for Brundisium when there
remained only a few days of December. It was in that
city he went through the ceremony of taking pofeffio
of that office.

C. J-

C. JVLIUS CEAI. l. ..o4.

Ant.C.
P. SE.YILlUS ISAURICUS. 41.
Cafar found at Bmndifium twelve legions and alt
his cavalry. Buts notwithstanding his orders te build
and assemble as many lhips as potfible, he had scarec
enough to embark seven legions and fix hundred
horse. And yet these legions were far from being
compleat. The Gaulilh wars, and their lot march.
from Spain to Brundisium, had contiaually thinned
their ranks; and their abode, during the heat of the
summer, in the untwholefome country of Apulia had
made most of them ill.

These many difficulties did not rertrd Cfar. He
assembles his forces, and represents to them, that the
end of all their labours drew near, and they had now
only one last effort to make; that, as he iad not
Ihips answerable to their number, they would do well
to leave behind them their baggage and laves that
would take up the room of serviceable people; and
that they should put all their hopes in viltory, and
the generosity of their General. They all readily
consented to what was proposed; and Cfat em-
barked in his transports twenty thousand legionary
soldiers and fix hundred horse, under an escort of but
twelve men of war. With this force he went to
face a fleet of five or fix hundred vefiels, and a land
army of above sixty thousand commanded by Pom-
pey.

He set fail the fourth of January, according to the
faulty calculation of the Romans, but, properly speak-
ing, on the fourteenth of Otober. The next day
he arrived at the * Ceraunian mountains; and having
found among the rocks and shelves, with which that
coast abounds, a tolerable road, he debarked: for he
durst not go to any port, as he knew they were all in
the enemy's pofleflon. In fa&, Lucretius VeiUo

' Monti della Chimera,

guarded

A R. 704. guarded that of Oricum t with eighteen men of wars
Ant. c. and Bibulus had an hundred and ten at Corcyra,

but the firfl durst not hazard an engagement; and the
other had not time to re-assemble his sailors and fol.
diers, who were dispersed in full security.

As loon as Cafar had landed his troops, his first
care was to fend back his hips to Brundisium, to
bring over his other legions and cavalry. Thirty of
these vessels fell into the hands of Bibulus; who had
put to sea, though somewhat late, and by a cruelty
the more detestable, as it was contrary to the humane
resolution made by those from whom he derived his
authority, he not only burnt the mhips, but also the
maters they belonged to, and the ailors on board,
Shame and vexation, for having suffered Cafar to pass
over, made him the more vigilant to prevent at least
the palfage of the forces yet in Italy; and he guarded
with extraordinary care all the coast from Salona§ in
Dalmatia to Oricum.

Pompey was then in Macedonia. Cefar, who de-
signed to seize on the maritime cities of Epirus, and
particularly on Dyrrachium, where all the enemy's
magazines were, dispatched to him, perhaps to amuse
him, Vibullius Rufus with new proposals for a peace.
This Vibullius had been twice taken by Caesar; the
first time at Corfinium, the next in Spain. Having
been therefore twice indebted to him for his life,
and being also much in Pompey's eteem, Caesar
thought him a proper person to negotiate between
them.

His inftrucions were: " That, after the misfor-
tunes they had both experienced, Pompey in Italy
and Spain, and Cefar in Illyricum and Afric, it was
time to learn from those bloody leflons, and liften to
an accommodation. That the present moment was
the moit favourable in that refpec, they could ever

+ A city of Epinis, near the Ceramian mountains.
3 Illand of Corfou.
6 This city is ruined ; and out of its ruini has been formed the
;it' of Spalatro, four miles of.

ex-
2

expe&; because, not having yet tried one another'sA.R. 7-.
strength, and confidering themselves as equals, there Ant.e'
would be more likelihood of agreeing on terms;
whereas, if one of them once got the superiority, he
would exac every thing from the other, arid give tp
nothing. He therefore proposed, that they fhouMl
agree to have their differences determined -at Rbome
by the Senate and People; and, that this judgment
might be made freely, that they should' oth swear
forthwith at the head of their armies, to'disband aH
their national and auxiliary forces in the space of three
days."

These proposals were palpably fallacious.' Pompey
would never content that this deterrnination should be
made at Rome, where his adversary' was then maser.
The project of disbanding all the aies' was more
specious than practicable; and, if it could have beefi
executed, would have been very unequal." Cefar's
veterans would have re-assembled about him on the
firit signal; whereas Pompey's new levies would' not
have been ob easily recalled. Lastly, Cafiar well knew
that Pompey had no inclination for peace. Thus it is
plain, as I have frequently observed, that 'he -only
endeavoured'to have appearances on his fide,:'and the
credit of pacific intentions, while he breathed nothing
but war.

This he prosecuted with his usual diligence. It cost
him no more to take possession of Oricum ap.d Apol-
lonia, than to prcint himself before those places; and
ali Epirus followed their example. There yet re-
mainecd the city of Dyrrachium ; towards which Caear
advanced with such diligence, that he nmarched a day
and a night without taking any reft himself, or allow-
in his soldiers to take any. This town was also the
cilinc objeft of Pompey's care, as fcon as he knew of
his adversary's landing in Greece. He ran thither in
hall, and was happy enough to get there ir-. XWhV'i
£a(lar found Dyrrachium was safe froml his attack, e
halted, and encamped on one fide of the river Apf!i:t;

'-* ' Yl-'r.F^

A. R. 704 Pompey came also with his whole force, and encamped
An C. on the other fide.

Caear could not undertake any thing more now,
till joined by his troops from Italy. But the coa
was so well guarded by the enemy, that their passage
was impracticable; and he wrote to Calenus, whom
he left at Brundisium, not to be in haste about corn.
ing over. This order was very timely. Calenus,
who had already failed out of port, put back again.
A single hip continued its route, and was taken by
Bibulus; who with his usual cruelty put to death all
on board, both freemen and slaves.

If Bibulus greatly incommoded Cafar, by being
master of the sea; Cefar, who was master on ihore,
was very troublesome to Bibulus, in his turn, by hin-
dering him from getting water or wood, or coming
near the shore. His fleet was obliged to fetch from
the island of Corcyra all its necessaries; and once,
when foul weather prevented their receiving refresh-
ments from thence, the soldiers were necessitated, for
want of water, to collec the dew which in the night
fell on the hides that covered their hips. Spite of
these difficulties, Bibulus kept at ea. But at las he
funk under them; for, being took ill, and not hav-
ing proper assistance on board, yet refuting to quit
his post, he died at sea. No body succeeded him in
the command of the whole fleet; but each squadron
was governed, independently of the reft, by its par-
ticular Commander.

The danger Dyrrachium was in, and Pompey's ea-
gernefs to succour it, had not afforded him leisure to
give audience to Vibullius Rufus. When things were
iomewhat quieter, in the camp near the river Apfus,
he sent for him, and ordered him to signify what he
had to fay from Cafar. But Vibullius had scarce be-
gan, before Pompey interrupted him, by exclaiming,
, What is my life or country to me, if I must be
· beholden to Cefar for them ? And will it be be-
" lieved that I am not indebted to him for them, if
' he by an accommodation restores me to Rome ?"

-- -~Cfarfi

Caffar, informed of this answer, continued the old A. R. 70.
game; and, the more intratable he found Pompey, A"nt.c
the more he affeed to make advances. Thus, as
the soldiers of the two armies often joined in conver-
fation, he took advantage of the opportunity; and
Vatinius by his order advanced to the river-side. We
know what fort of a man this Vatinius was; and that
there centered in him every thing that was capable of
exciting contempt and hatred. No mouth could be
so proper to discredit even the language of equity and
reason. He cried with a loud voice, " Will it not
, be permitted to citizens to fend Deputies to their
, fellow-citizens about peace ? This is what is never
" refused, even to robbers and pirates. And can
"c there be pirer intentions than ours, since we only
" labour to prevent the civil butchery of friends and
" countrymen ?"
If we are to credit Cafar's relation, his adversary
conented to an interview, only to put in execution an
aft of perfidy: For the next day, when the Deputies
on both fides were met at the time and place ap-
pointed, while Labienus was debating with Vatinius,
on a sudden those of Pompey's party threw their jave-
lins, and wounded several of Ciefar's people, and Va-
tinius himself escaped with difficulty, being covered
by the soldiers shields. Labienus then lifted up his
voice, and cried, " Leave off prating of an accom-
" modation: for you muff not expe& peace, till you
"bring us Cefar's head." A moss brutal declaration
from a man, who ought at least to have had in re-
fpedful remembrance the benefits he had received
from his old General!

But I cannot help observing, that for the fast I
have juss now related, and some preceding ones of the
fame nature, we have no other authority than Cafar's;
and it is not just to credit him altogether in what re-
fie&s on his enemies. To be sure there was great
haughtiness and severity in the procedure of Pompey
and his partizans. These accounts of their cruelt?
and perfidy may be true , but they may also be ex-

YOL. IX. I aggerted;

A.R. 704.aggerated, and even altered in particulars of m.
Ant. C.

+R. ment.

The armies of Cafar and Pompey continued a good
while in fight of one another, separated only bya
frnall river, without any thing passing between them
but ome fight skirmishes. The great obje& of the
care of their two Generals was the army left at Brun.
difium; which Cafar impatiently expected, and
whose passage Pompey was greatly interested to pre.
vent. Libo, who commanded a fleet of fifty hips,
flattered himself for some time that he should be able
to detain there troops in Italy, and absolutely hinder
them from putting to ea. He came with his fleet
and took possession of a little island over-againft the
port of Brundisium; and, if he could -have main.
tained his post, would have so blocked up the port
that nothing could have stirred out. But Anthony,
who was then in the town, having posted cavalry all
along the coast to hinder the enemy from watering,
Libo was forced to retire ignominiously.

Several months were spent in this manner, and the
winter was almost over, which was the only time for
Cafar's forces to hazard the passage. If they flayed
till fine weather, Pompey's fleet, being then able to
act and extend itself, would render it absolutely im-
pracicable. Caesar could not but think that his Lieu-
tenants were negligent, and had let flip some precious
moment, when a fair wind might have brought them
to Greece. A delay, so contrary to his temper, ex-
tremely vexed him. The want he was in of a rein-
forcement, his uneasiness and impatience, perhaps,
too, even ome suspicion of Anthony's fidelity, made
him resolve on an experiment, which he takes no no-
tice of in his Commentaries, doubtless on account of
its rashness; but which all other writers unanimously
report.
Prut. He determined to go in person after the tardy
Appian. troops. For this purpose he ent, towards night,
Dcan. three slaves to hire a bark on the river, as it were for

a courier from him to Italy. Towards midnight he

came
8

came himself, disguised as a slave; and they set out. A. R. 7,.
The wind was high; however, they got well enough An4ti.C
to the river's mouth. But there, the waves of the
sea, meeting with the water of the river, put the lit-
tle veflel in such manifest danger, that the master or-
dered the rowers to turn back, since it was not pof-
fible to advance. Cfar upon this discovers himself;
and addretfing the master, * " What are you afraid of?
,' fays he, you carry Cafar and his Fortune." The
master and crew, extremely furprized, redouble their
efforts, and vigorously ftem the waves. But they
were at last forced to give way to an element not to be
overcome by human obstinacy: and, as it was near
day, and Caesar was afraid of being seen by the ad-
vanced guards of the enemy, he suffered himself,
with much relu&ance, to be carried back to the place
where he embarked. Thus he returned to his camp;
having attempted an ation more becoming, if I may
fay so, a Partizan, than a General.
The courage and confidence of his soldiers were
such, that, when they saw him come back, they com-
plained, that he hould not think himself secure of
vitory with them alone. They thought it strange,
that he should expose himself in going after other
forces, as if those he had were not sufficient. On the
other fide, those who were left in Italy burnt with
impatience to cross the sea; and, tanding on the
Ihore and beach, looked towards Epirus; hastening,
at least by their wishes, the hour of their departure.
But their officers detained them on account of the
danger.
Cafar well knew the ardour of his soldiers. He
therefore wrote in a severe manner to his Lieute-
nants at Brundisium, commanding them to fail the
first fair wind; and, in cafe they did not fpeedilv
execute his orders, he gave Pothumius, who brought
them, a letter addressed to the soldiers themselves; in
* Qid times ? Cefarem vehis. FLOR. Plutarch and Appian add,
"hat I have xpreffed, xi 7iw Kir, T.t

I 2 which

A. R. 74. which he exhorted them to embark under the con
Ant. c. du of this Pofthumius, and to trouble themselves

about nothing but getting on shore, without minding
what became of the hips; because, he said, he want.
ed men, not ships. He acquainted them, that they
would fland the best chance of escaping the enemy
on the coast of Apollonia.
Ca Such prefling orders had the desired effea. An.

thony and Calenus took advantage of a south wind;
and having embarked in their transports four legions
(three of which were old corps, and one new-raifed)
and eight hundred horse, put to sea. They were in
great danger in the passage; and escaped merely by
a piece of luck, which, farfromjuftifying, evidences
on the contrary the temerity of their enterprize. They
were discovered off of Dyrrachium. Immediately
Coponius flips out of port after them, with sixteen
Rhodian gallies. The fight would have been very
unequal between gallies and transports; therefore
Anthony and Calenus had nothing to do but to make
off as fait as possible. But finding themselves vigo-
roufly pursued, and almost overtaken, they ran into
a small port, which did not fielter them from the
south wind. But they preferred the hazard of being
loft to that of fighting, At that instant the wind
changed from south to south-west, and put them in-
perfect security; for the south-west wind did not in-
commode them in the port. The fame wind, which
is tempestuous, beat so furiously on the Rhodian gal.
lies, that they were broke to pieces against the hore.
Not one escaped; and almost all their crews were
drowned. Coponius, however, was saved. Several
of the rowers were also taken out of the water by Ce-
far's people, and sent into their country, with great
humanity. What would have become of Anthony,
what of Caxfar himself, had it not been for this change
of wind, which looks like an incident contrived on
purpose to deliver them from a danger into which an
excessive boldness had precipitated them ? What
judgment would have passed on Csfar's orders, if his

trani-
7

transports had been either beat and took by the Rho- A. R. 704.
dian squadron, or broke to pieces in the port by the Ant. C.
violence of the wind 4.
Two hips of Anthony's fleet were left behind;
and, not knowing what route their Commander had
took, they dropped anchor over-againft Liffus, a
little town on the fame coast as Dyrrachium, to the
north, and three miles from the port of Nymphteum,
wherein Anthony had been saved. Otacilius, who
commanded in Liffus, immediately sent several ships
to take there two vefiels, or compel them to furren-
der. On this occasion appeared, as Cefar observes,
how great a difference different degrees of courage
make in the condition of men exposed to the fame
danger. One of these vessels carried two hundred and
twenty new-raifed soldiers; the other less than two
hundred veterans. The new levies, frighted at the
number of their adversaries, and fatigued with sea-
sickness, surrendered, on promise of their lives. But
Otacilius did not keep his word; for he ordered them
all to be cruelly slain in his pretence. The veterans,
on the contrary, would not hear of laying down their
arms, and obliged the pilot to run the vessel ashore.
Thus they landed; and, Otacilius having sent against
them four hundred horse, they made a stout defence,
killed some of them, and rejoined the main army.

Soon after, Anthony was received into Liffus; from
whence he returned most of his hips to Brundisium,
to fetch over the remaining troops designed for tranf-
portation; reserving nevertheless some fiips of Gaulish
ftruclure, that, if Pompey (as it was rumoured) should
attempt to return to Italy, Caesar might be able to
fo4ow him.
Anthony's intention was to join his General. Pom-
pey made some motions to hinder this junction; and
even endeavoured to furprize Anthony into an am-
bufcade; but in vain. Cfar, informed of the arri-
val of the long-expeted reinforcement, went to meet
it; and, having effected the juncion, found himself
at the head of eleven legions, which, though incom-

I 3 pleat,

A.R. 704 pleat, made nevertheless an army of forty tH a
Ant. C.

men.

Pompey's forces, which were already more confi
derable than Cafar's as to number, received also a
augmentation about the fame time by the arrival
Metellus Scipio in Macedonia. This man, more i~
luflrious on account of his birth and rank, than of hi
capacity and conduct, had been lent into Syria at the
beginning of the war, as I mentioned, in the quality
of Proconsul; to draw from thence what troops were
there, and bring them to the assistance of his fon-in
law Pompey. He discharged his trust in a manner
that did no honour to his party. He is accused ia
Cxfar's Commentaries of exacions, opprefflons, ad
vexations of all forts, throughout Syria and Alia Mi,
nor. True it is, that Cafar seems to have had a per.
fonal dislike to him, and takes a palpable pleasure in
speaking ill of him. But all we know from other
hands, concerning the life and proceedings of Metel.
lus Scipio, gives us no right to fufpe& Cfar's tefi-.
mony, though he was his enemy. We may call to
mind fmre things we have mentioned elsewhere: and
Jfr. Ant. Josephus relates, that, while he was in Syria, he be.
&,5." headed Alexander, Prince of the Jews, under the

frivolous pretext of his having formerly occafione~
some disturbance in Judsa ; but in truth because hefa,
voured Cefar's cause, like his unfortunate father Anr
ftcbulus, who had been poisoned a little before by
Pompey's partizans for the fame reason.
Crf. Scipio even pretended to have a particular reafoa

for conniving at the licence of his troops; who, hay.
ing been originally destined to war againlt the Parthi.
ans, did not march with a good-will against a o.
man, and a Consul. In order therefore to attach them
to him, he allowed them all kinds of robbery; and
he himself took every opportunity to plunder, that
he might have wherewithal to be liberal to them. He
was going to seize on the treasures of the Ephesian
Diana, when he received letters from Pompey, defir-
ing him to haften tj him, because Cfar had pafled

ino

into Greece. This is what prevented the pillage of A. R. 704.
that celebrated, refpeaed, temple. Ant. C.
When Scipio got into Macedonia, he found him-
felfoppofed by Domitius Calvinus, a Lieutenant of
Cfar, at the head of two legions. For, as oon as
Cafar was strong enough, he took care to extend him-
self, and get more room. Till then he was sup-
plied with provisions only from Epirus; all the reft
of Greece, and the sea, were in possession of the enemy.
As therefore Deputies had been ent to him from
iEtolia, Theffalia, and Macedonia, who engaged to
make those countries declare for him, if he would
fend ome troops there, he made three great detach-
ments; one of five cohorts and a fnall body of horse,
for Etolia, under Calvifius Sabinus; another for
Thessaly, of one legion and two hundred horse, under
L. Caflius Longinus; and a third (the most confider-
able) under Domitius Calvinus, for Macedonia, of
two legions and five hundred horse.
Sabinus met with the least opposition. The 7Etoli-
ans received him with open arms; and he easily
drove Pompey's garrisons out of Naupa&tum and Lepanto.
Calydon.
In Thessaly there was a powerful party against
Cefar; and, Metellus Scipio being come up with his
army, L. Cafflius was constrained to fly 'the country.
He then fell on Acarnania, which he easily subdued.
Some time after, upon receiving fresh orders from
Caesar, Cassius and Calvifius joined; and Fufius Ca-
lenus, being sent to take the command of the com-
bined detachment, entered into Beotia and Phocis,
and made himself master of Delphi, Thebes, and
Orchomenus, He intended to penetrate into Pelo-
ponnefus; but Rutilius Lupus, Pompey's Lieute-
nant, hindered him by walling up the Ithmus of Co-
rinth.

As for Domitius Calvinus, Metellus Scipio and he
kept one another in play, without any thing of mo-
ment happening between them,

1 4 All

A. R. 704. All these little expeditions were indecisive of the
An. c. main business, which depended on the operations d

the two grand armies. Pompey, having been difip.
pointed with refpe& to Anthony, encamped at a place
called Afparagium. Cefar followed him, and offered
him battle. But it was not agreeable to Pompey's
views to hazard an aion. He knew Cefar's soldi.
ers were invincible by fair fighting. Besides, he wai
in a good situation to protrat the war, having plenty
of all things, and being master of all the seas; o
that no wind could blow but what brought him either
reinforcements or convoys. Cefar, on the contray,
was under difficulties; he was supplied with provi.
sions by a country of small extent, and had fcarcc
any corn. Pompey therefore pretended to reduce hi
adversary by want, without rifquing an engagement.
He had aed wifely, and been happy, if he had per.
fevered in this resolution to the last.

Csfar could not compel him to fight. He there-
fore turned off to Dyrrachium, where Pompey's ma.
azines were, as we have observed. Pompey was not
aware of his adversarys design, till late, and so could
not hinder Casfar from getting between him and Dpy
rachium. But he came and encamped a little way of,
in a place called Petra, where he had rill the advan
tage of the sea.

Cafar then formed the boldest project perhaps that
ever came into a General's head. With an inferior
army, almost famished, he undertook to inclose in
lines more numerous forces, who had received no
check, and abounded in all things. His views herein
were, first to facilitate the passage of his convoys
which the enemy's cavalry, which was very itrong and
fine, would no longer cut off; next, to diftrefsthis
very cavalry, for want of forage; and lastly, to lessen
the great reputation and high idea entertained of Ponl
pev. He had a mind to have it reported all over th
world, that Pompey suffered himself to be blockaded
and as it were imprisoned, by Caesar's works; and
durst not hazard a battle to set himself at liberty.

The country ielf gave Cfar a hint towards this A.R. 7
proje&. All round Pompey's camp, at a small dif- A c',
tance, were steep hills. Caesar built forts on these
hills, and drew lines of communication from one fort
to another. Pompey, who would not leave the sea
and Dyrrachium, nor give battle, could do nothing
but extend himself to give his adversary the more
trouble. This he did: he made within the fame
works as Cefar did without: he raised twenty-four
forts, which took in a circumference of fifteen miles,
wherein were arable and pasture lands to feed his
horses and beasts of burthen. He even perfeted the
work before his adversary: as his took up a less cir-
cuit, and he had more hands.
It is easy to conceive, that though there was no ge-
neral aion, because Pompey declined it, yet it was
impossible to prevent many engagements, which some-
times became important. Of these I hall relate the
most remarkable circumfiances. In an aion, in
which Cafar attempted to make a lodgment on an
eminence that interfered with his lines, his troops
were attacked so briskly by the Pompeians, that a re-
treat became necessary. This too was not easy, as it
was to be made by a pretty steep descent: and Pom-
pey went o far as to fay, " that he consented to be
"accounted a General of no merit, if Cefar's men
i got off without considerable loss." Caesar refuted
this bravado by fa&. He ordered his soldiers to fix
in the ground some hurdles, in the manner we now
ife fascines; behind which they dug a moderate
ditch. When this was done, he began to file off the
legionary soldiers, supporting them by some light-
armed troops posted on their flanks, who with arrows
and stones repulsed the enemy. Pompey's troops
failed not to pursue them with great outcries and
fierce menaces, overturned the hurdles, and used
them as bridges to get over the ditch. Cfar, who
did not choose to seem drove from a post, which he
quitted voluntarily; when his forces were got half
down the hill, gave them the signal to face about and

fall

A-. 7fall on the enemy; which they did with such vigou

4C' and impetuosity, that their pursuers took to flight, and

with much difficulty cleared the ditch and hurdles
which stopped their way. Many of them were killed:
Cafar loft but five men, and effected his retreat with.
out any further interruption.

A much more memorable day than this was that
wherein there happened fix ations at once, three
near Dyrrachium, and three about the lines. We
have loft the particulars Caesar gave us of these en-
gagements in his Commentaries. Almost all we know
of them is reducible to an instance of valour scarce to
be credited. One of Cefar's cohorts (that is a batta-
lion of five hundred men at most, and which probably
was incompleat) defended a fort several hours againit
four of Pompey's legions.
rat. c=ff. He who got the most honour in this glorious de-
Appian.
LuPcn. fence was the Centurion Scxva *. I have already
vl. Max-. took notice of the extraordinary valour he shewed on
I. this occasion. Being entrusted with the care of one

of the gates of the fort, he drove off the enemy;
though he was wounded in the head, run through
the shoulders and the thigh, and had loft one eye.
In this condition he called to a Centurion of the other
fide, as it were to surrender; who coming up to him
unguardedly, Scaeva thrust his sword through his
body.
crf. In a word, the whole cohort kept their post till two

legions came to their assistance, who easily difcom-
fited Pompey's four. The intrepid warriors, who
had maintained their ground with such obstinate va-
lour, were all wounded: they brought and counted
to Caesar about thirty thousand arrows that had been
shot into the fort and shewed him Scava's buckler,

* See Vol. VIII. Some different circumstances may be observed in
t&-tfe two relations. In the first I follow Plutarch: Here particularly
Valerius Maximus and Lucan. The fame faCt cannot pass through
different hands, without suffering some alteration. As never a one
<,f my authors has on this occasion a pre-eminent authority, I have
mn e no (cruple of a little variation in my narration. If we had this
story as reiated by Caiar, I hould have adhered to him implicitly.

which

which was pierced in two hundred and thirty places. A. .
Cafar took care that such astonishing valour liould Ant.
not go unrewarded. He presented Sc'eva with * two
hundred thousand aes, and advanced him dire&ly
from the eighth rank of Captains to the first. He
also distributed military rewards among the other of-
ficers and soldiers of that cohort; and assigned them
double pay, and double allowance of corn.
However worthy of admiration the courage of this
cohort may be, I do not know whether we ought not
to admire more the patience with which the whole
army persevered, in the greatest want. It is true,
they had flesh, but they had no corn; and, when in-
stead of it they had barley or pulse given them, they
took it chearfully, remembering that last year in
Spain, and several times in Gaul, after having suffered
much more, they had at last triumphed over their
enemies. They discovered in the country a root,
called by Caesar Chara, which they pounded and
kneaded with milk, so as to make a fort of bread of
it: and when their adversaries reproached them with
their want, by way of answer to their insults, they
threw these loaves at them ; faying, that, as long as
the earth produced such roots, they would never re-
lease them: and they often said to one another, that
they would sooner live on the bark of trees than let
Pompey escape. Where is the wonder, that a Ge-
nerai, who could inspire his soldiers with such fen-
timents, hould be always victorious ? The talent of
thus raising the courage of the soldiery implies many
others, and almost gives me a higher idea of Cafar
than all his vitories.
Pompey was frighted at the coniftancy and refolu- Suet. c.
tion of his adversaries. He said, " he had to do with'C.· .
" wild beasts;" and concealed as much as possible Put. C'
the loaves of Chara thrown into his lines, left the fight
of that strange nourishment should dishearten his army.

While the war was carried on with such fury, Cefar
still feigned an inclination for peace. Having been

About fix hundred pounds, Rerling.

{o

Al7c4. so often repulsed by Pompey, he addressed himsel
Aa C. now to Metellus Scipio; and wanted to enter into

negotiation with him by the ministry of a commoi
friend. His enemies continued to do him service, b
taking on themselves the odium of the refusal. Sci
pio listened at first to Cafar's Deputy, but prefentl
refused to hear or fee him: and Clodius, for that wa,
the name of this Negotiator, returned to Caesar fuc.
cefslefs.

Mean while Pompey, inclosed as he was by Cefar,
suffered great inconveniencies. He wanted two very
necessary things, water and forage. He was in want
of water, because his enemy turned the river, and
fopped up the springs; so that his troops were
forced to look out for pools, and to dig wells, which
the heat oon dried up. As to forage, the corn sown
within their lines supplied them for ome time; but
afterwards they were obliged to have it sent them by
sea; and, as they could not get enough that way,
they were forced to have recourse to barley, herbage
of all forts, and even the leaves of trees. At last, all
expedients being exhausted, and the horses dying
daily, Pompey thought it time to attempt to force the
barricade, and set himself at liberty.

While he was busied with this project, two defer-
ters of consequence came to him, with informations
that greatly facilitated its execution. They were two
brothers, named Rofcillus and Egus, Allobroges by
birth, valiant men, who had been long attached to
Caesar; and who, having been very serviceable to him
in his Gaulish wars, had in recompence been loaded
with honours and riches. These men, perceiving
how much they were confidered by the General, grew
thereupon insolent; used their troopers ill, defrauded
them often of their pay, and even imposed on C;far
by receiving pay for more men than they had. Com-
plaints were therefore made to Cafar, who did not
think proper to make a buffle, but reprimanded them
in private. These haughty Gauls, piqued at the di-
-.!ution of their credit, and at the raillery they were

often

ftn forced to bear, resolved to change fides; and A. R. 7a*
ent into Pompey's camp with some of their depen- ALc'
nts. The acquisition of these Officers was matter
f triumph to that General; not only on account of
eir personal qualities, but because, till then, no-
ody had deserted from Caesar; whereas scarce a day
afledwithout some desertion from Pompey's army.
ofilius and ]Egus were ostentatiously carried all over
he camp. But, besides this fatisfation, which was
rather vain than solid, they did their new friends an es-
fential service, by acquainting them with the foible of
Cfar's lines.
Pompey laid hold on the advantage, and made so
vigorous and well-contrived a sally, that he carried all
before him. He attacked the extremity of the ene-
my's lines, towards the ea, a good distance from the
main camp: and the forces there had like to have
been cut to pieces, had not Mark Anthony come to
their assistance with twelve cohorts. He put a stop
to the Viaor's progress. But the lines were forced,
and Pompey was at liberty; being able to forage,
and having an easy communication with the sea.
In this aion, he who carried the eagle of the ninth
legion manifested sentiments worthy of a soldier of
Cafar. As he was dangerously wounded, and found
his itrength fail, he called to some troopers who pas-
fed by, and said to them: * " I have preserved, to
"the last moment of my life, with the greatest care,
"this eagle, with which I have been entrusted; and,
"now I am dying, I return it to Cefar, with the
"fame fidelity. Carry it to him, I beseech you;
" nor susser Caesar's arms to experience, in losing it,
"an ignominy with which they have been hitherto
" unacquainted." Thus the eagle was saved from the
disaster of the legion.

Hanc ego & vivus multos per annos magna diligentia defendi, &
nunc moriens, eadem fide Cefari reftituo. Nolite, obfecro, commit-
tere, quod ante in exercitu Cafaris non accidit, ut rei militaris dede-
cus admittatur incolunemque ad eum referte. C5s. de B. Civ. III.

CTfar

AR. 704. Cafar was not present in this engagement, te
Ant. scene of ation being remote from his quarters. e

endeavoured the fame day to have his revenge, y
carrying off one of Pompey's legions. But fometf
the troops, intended for this expedition, miffed thei
way; which gave Pompey time to succour the legio
in danger. The face of affairs was iniftantly changed,
Those who were before in a manner besieged, took
courage, and repulsed the assailants. Cefar's forces,
on the contrary, aimed at nothing but a retreat. Bug
as the ground was disadvantageous the horse took
fright first, and ran away. The panic communicated
itself to the infantry. These invincible warriors fly
precipitately, and throw one another down, under
their General's eyes. All his efforts to rally them are
fruitless. If he seized any by the arm, they struggled
till they got away. If he laid hold of the colours,
they left them in his hands. There was even an En.
sign who presented the point of his sword, as going to
flab him; but he was immediately killed by those
about Cefar.

The defeat was corpleat; and, if Pompey had
come up dire&ly and attacked Cafar's lines briskly,
there would have been an end of Cafar's army and
Put Prm. fortune. He himself was of this opinion; for he
& C{f. fays on this fubje&, ' that his adversaries would have

been victorious, if their General had known how to
conquer." Pompey was apprehensive of an ambuscade,
and loft, by over-caution, an opportunity that never
returned.

Cafar's loss in there two actions was considerable.
He owns the slain and prisoners to amount to nine
hundred and sixty private men, thirty Officers, and
some Roman Knights and Senators sons. He loft alla
thirty-two-colours. The prisoners were delivered up
to Labienus on his request; and this deserter, brutal
and cruel, as usual, diverted himself with insulting
them in their calamity; and asked them sarcastically,
if it was usual for veterans to run away; after which
he caused them to be put to death.

Caiar,

Czfar, having received such a check, fbmitted to A,-.-
ortune. He found he could not prosecute his scheme, 4~.
od therefore gave it up. He called in all his forces
0orn the forts ; he no longer thought of attacking or
nclofing the enemy ; he aimed at nothing but a e-
at, till fich time as he hould find, or make, a bet-
r opportunity. He assembles his soldiers, and cor-
rts them by all the arguments he could think of.
his was'what was very necessary; reprimands would
ae been unseasonable. For they were so ashamed
d grieved, that they undertook to punish themselves
ythe severest impositions. Cafar therefore con-
nted himself with stigmatizing, and reducing to pri-
te men, some of the Ensigns: whose punishment
e soldiers applauded. Moreover they demanded,
ith great outcries, to be led against the enemy, that
ey might expunge the stain their glory had received.
ut Cefar did not think it prudent to expose to an
ion troops that had beenjuft worffed, and in whom
ight remain too deep impressions of their late fright.
e determined to quit Epirus, and go into Thessaly.
He conducted this retreat so skilfully, that though he
had very difficult ways to pass, and ome great rivers
to cross, he suffered no loss, though pursued by Pom-
peyfor three days. On the fourth, Caesar having
got a day's march, Pompey flopped, and left him to
continue his route; he then held a Council on the use
he hould make of the superiority he had acquired over
his adversary.
Afranius, and some others, were for going into Plu.
Italy; and he enforced his opinion with some strong Pomp.
arguments. He represented, that Italy was not in a
condition to make any defence; and that, as oon as
they set foot in it, the nations and cities would re-
ceive them with joy. He added, that, when they
were once masters of Italy, they should also neceffa-
rily be so of the dependent islands, Sicily, Sardinia,
Corsica, and even of Gaul and Spain. Lastly, he
pretended, that it became good citizens to deliver
their Country, who expeted it from them; and not

A.R. 704. to let it groan any longer under oppressions, nor f
At c, vexed and insulted by the Ministers and Slaves i

Tyrants.

Pompey was not asseted by there teafong. E
seemed to him inglorious to fly a second tinme, bfon
an enemy who mightfollow them. Besides, he thought
justly, that he ought not to abandon Metellus Scii
and his army, who, if he went into Italy, would in.e
vitably fall a prey to Csefar. And, as to the regard
to be paid to his Country, he thought the best way to
Thew that, was, not to make Italy the scene of thX
horrors of war, but, on the contrary, to prosecute
in a distant region; so that Rome, being mere fpe&.
trix of the war, might have nothing to do but to ad.
mit her Conqueror. He therefore determined to cob
tinue in Greece, and there decide the quarrel.
Car. He did not, however, obstinately follow Cfari

whom he had no hopes of overtaking, but formed
design of weakening him, by furprizing Domitiw
Calvinus, his Lieutenant, who with two legions flop.
ped Metellus Scipio on the confines of Thessaly and
Macedonia. This scheme was well-imagined, and
had like to have succeeded. Calvinus knew nothing
of what had happened at Dyrrachium. Caesar's cou-
riers had not been able to get to him; because,
since Pompey's success, all the country declared so
him, whom they had already confidered as vicorious
So that Calvinus was in perfect security; and, hay:
ing left Metellus Scipio for the convenience of pro-
visions and forage, was atually marching (without
knowing it) to meet Pompey, and deliver himself into
his hands. A lucky accident saved him. Someof
the enemy's scouts, of the number of those Allobroga
deserters I spoke of, met those of Calvinus; and
knowing them, as they had served together formerly
in Gaul, entered into conversation with them, and in-
formed them of all that had passed; of Pompey's vie.
tory, and Cafar's retreat. Advice was immediately
given of this to Calvinus; and he marched back again
so propos, that Pompey miffed of him but byfourhours,

- C alu

Cefar foresaw Calvinus's danger, and was in full A. R. 704.
march to join him. But the care of his sick and Ant. C.
wounded, whom he was necessitated to leave in sone
place of safety, and other unavoidable business, had
retarded him. Calvinus however efeaped from Porn-
pey in the manner related, and joined Cefar-near
I inium, a town on the borders of Thessaly.
This was what Cafar principally ddfired. Uncer-
tain what projects Pompey might forfn after the'a&ti-
ons at Dyrrachium, he had confidered every thing;
and thought it necessary at all events to turn towards
Thessaly, and there re-unite his whole strength. If
Pompey passed into Italy, he purposed (after havihg
joined Calvinus) to wind round the AdRartic ea by
the coast of Illyricum, and thus go to the defence of
Italy. Pompey might tke other measures, and fall
on the maritime cities of Epirus, in which Cafar had
left garrisons. In that cafe he reckoned to oblige
him, by attacking Metellus Scipio, to leave every
thing to succour him. Lastly, if Pompey marched
towards Thessaly, Calvinus's danger woul have com-
pelled Cafar to have done the fame. And this last
plan suited him best, because in that cafe his adver-
fary, leaving the ea, loft the infinite advantage thence
rcfulting; all things were then equal between them,
except numbers, which never frighted Cefar.
Things having fell out according to his withes, he
endeavoured to penetrate into Thessaly. But the
Gloies lately sustained by him, had altered the difpo-
fition of the people; and, though before the whole
country had ent Deputies to him to proffer their ser-
vice, vet now the city of Gomphi, which woas the first
hecame to, hut its gates against him. Ceiar was
aware of the consequences of such a precedent; and,
toprevent its bad effeds, he immediately assaulted
the town so vigorously, that he was matier of it be-
fore evening, ad gave it up to be plundered. The Ap-:n-
Conqueror found there all forts of eceffaries, and Ci1.' iL
particularly great quantities of wine. As his troops
ad long fared ill, they now made themiervcs amfends,
VOL. IX. K and

A.R. c+-and drank to excess, particularly the Germans. Thi,
Ant. . debauch, by stirring the humours of their bodies

45' which were naturally robust and vigorous, re-ed.

blifhed their health, which was impaired by the had.
ships they had endured; and that, which would hae
killed delicate men, restored to these veterans thei
pristine vigour.

Appian relates, that a house at Gomphi.prefented
to those who entered it a very tragical fpe&acie,
twenty dead bodies of venerable old men ftretchedon
the ground, as in a drunken fit, having each of them
his cup by him. Only one was yet fitting, with his
cup in his hand. This was the Physician, who, after
he had administered the poison to the others, had taken
it himself in his turn. The apprehension of the ter.
rible calamities that attend a storm drove them to
this deed of desperation.

From Gomphi Cxfar marched expeditiously to the
city of Metropolis, whose inhabitants at first imitated
their neighbours, being unacquainted with their mi!
fortune. But, as loon as informed of it by fome.pr
foners from Gomphi, who were sent to them, they
opened their gates in haste, and admitted Cafar; who
suffered no hostilities to be committed, nor any harm
to be done them.

The different treatment of these two cities was
lesson to all the others in TheiTaly. Not one refused
to submit to Cefar, and receive his orders, except
Lariffa, into which Metellus Scipio had entered with
all his troops. He advanced then without difficulty
to Pharlalia, a place he was going to immortalize by
one of the molt important battles that history has prc-
served. As the country was good, and covered with
corn that was near ripe, Cfar judged it a proFec
place to wait for Pompey in. Pompey did not loier;
but, having joined Metellus Scipio, came and en-
camped near Caelar. He nared the honours of ti:e
command with his father-in-law, and would have lli
treated in all things as his equal.

SECT.

SEC T. I.
diculous prisfunttian and rudely of the partisans f
ponpey. Thbir murnurings at the trudent dely of
their General. Secret views of Pompe in iueb delay.
He leaves Cato at Dyrracbium.. 'he reasons for this
procedure. Cicero also continues at yrrachium: Hiis
,barp and peeviib.railries. Cefar endeavours to came
to a general engagement. Pompey, after many delays,
at length advances to meet him. Batte of Pbarfalia.
Strange condu of Pompey. His fpigbt. Cefar forces
the enemy's camp. Remarkable aying of .Cfar. He
purfuesfucb as bad /heltered them/elves in the adjacent
rotuntains, and compCls them to furrendsr. The loss
Cefar fufaived in the battle of Pbarfalia. His gene-
rofiy after viHSry. He is well pleased withfaving
Brutus. The battle of Pharfalia foretold at Dyrra-
chium, and knawn at Padua, in a very extraordinary
ard almost miraculous manner. Pompey's flight. He
goes to Mitylene to fetch is wife. Di/courfes with
Cratippus on Providence. Continues his journey, and
detormines to rek protec7ian in Egypt. Goes there, and
is afaffinated. Reflctions on h;s death and charatter.
His murderers cut off his head. His -body is mealy
buried by one of his freedmen. L. Letulus arrives iv
Egypt, and is there killed. The conquered follow va-
rious interests. Cicero goes to Brundufium, where he
waits a co;fiderable time for Cfar. Cato, at the head
of the greatest part of the fleet, advances towards Li-
lyafor intelligence. He hears of Pomp <y's death y
Sex. Pcnzipeius ad by Cornelia. fakes upon im the
icmiiand, and is received at Cyrene.

SK 2 C. JtLIUS

A.R. 7-. C. JULIUS CASAR II.
Ant. C.

4. P. SERVILIUS ISAURICUS.
Plut ~ REA T was the confidence of Pompey's parte
Pe tde B. after the ation of Dyrrachium. From t;
C.l. 11. time both officers and soldiers looked on themfelva

as compleatly vi&orious, and on that account report
every where the advantages they had gained, and t
news of Cefar's retreat. This confidence was attende
by as great ralhnefs and folly: For how otherwise a
those warm contests to be accounted for, which w
carried great lengths, between Lentulus Spinthe
Domitius Ahenobarbus, and Metellus Scipio, for th
High Priesthood, which Cafar was in possession of
i'Thee three competitors for a dignity which therew
not the least profpe& would be vacant, pleaded th
several causes, alledged their several titles and preten.
sions, and madly divided the spoils of an enemy, who
triumph they were hortly to grace by their flight,
death.

This instance of presumption, all extravagant
it appears, was not the only one, and examples
the like madness were very frequent in Pompey
carmp. Some hired houses near the Forum, as morn
ccnvenier.t o follicit the employments of the enfuin
year; whilit othcrs were making votes in theve
army. The deputation of Hirrus, sent againf th
PAirthians, occasioned great uneasiness; because Pom
pey, to induce him to accept of this commission, ha
;pcmifed him the Pratorfhip, notwithstanding hi
absence: And such as aspired at this office took i
much amiifs, and complained publickly, that apr
mi:; cf a place thould be made to any one candidate,
which cor.l-qcce:tly mutu put the reft under the nece
f;it of makirg greater interef, to prevent their mikar
,'.ng. They aifo divided the booty among them
and L. Lentulus, who was Consul the preceding year
took for his hare the house of Hortenfius, son of the
Ilnous Orator of that name, and who had a comman

in the opposite party; with Cefar's gardens on the A. R. 704
banks of the Tiber, and his country house near Baie Al
in Campania.
Nor did revenge less employ their thoughts than
ambition and plunder. This was not confined to such
nlv as had taken up arms against them: whoever
ad staid in Italy was to be esteemed and treated as an
nemy. The * proscription was atually drawn up,
notfor the condemnation of particular persons, but
f each particular rank of persons. And Domitius's
ropofal was, that after the victory, all the Senators
nPompey's army and camps should be appointed
udges in what manner to proceed in regard to those
ho had staid in Italy, or who had appeared cool,
r (hewn any indifference to the cause and that three
illets lhould be given to these judges, one for ac-
ittance, another for condemnation, and the third for
pecuniary fine. In a t word, nothing was thought
nbut honours and profit, or vengeance; nor did
hey confider by what method they were to conquer,
ut what advantage they hould make of vi&ory.
The consequence of this their manner of thinking
as, that every delay became insupportable to them;
nd every one was forward in blaming Pompey's
ally prudent management to avoid coming to action,
d his endeavours to harrafs the enemy by fatigue
d want of provisions. 'Twas commonly said, that
e had a mind to make the most of his command, and
keep in a manner as his body-guards, and in a
ind f slavery, Senators and persons of Consular
ignity, whose rank entitled them to the command of
atins: And in this sense Domitius Ahenobarbus
ontinually called him Agamemnon, and King of
ings. Favonius, that extravagant imitator of Cato,
Ied if at least for that year they might be permitted
Non nominatim, fed genetim profcriptio. ... informata. Cc.
itt. XI. 6,
t Poftremo omnes aut de honoribus fuis, aut de premiis pecunix,
ut de perfequendis inimicis agebant; nec quibus rationibus fuperare
f..en:, fed quemadmodum uui viCtori deberent cogitabant. Ci.s.

K 3 ' * to

A R. 74.to eat of the Tufculine figs. And when they Were
Ant. C. about to impeach Afranius, for having given tp Spain

to Cfar, in consideration of a fum of money;.
seemed furprized that the managers of a profecutioft of
this kind gainft him, should take no noticeof tlt
vender of provinces.
Plt. These reproaches were the more evere, as they
Pomp. & were not wholly without foundation; and felf-ittereft
C';. had some share in this eeming circumspection, ad

its consequential delays. Zeal for public liberty a
not Pompey's only motive; he greatly confideted him.
self through the whole affair, and his fchenie was o
continue the Diredor, and perhaps the Governor o
the Republic: For this reason he was much alarned
when he was informed of the intention of his cavalry;
which being composed of the flower of the Roman No.
bilitv, exhorted each other to be expeditious in the de.
ftruetion of Caesar, that they might the sooner effe
Pompey's ruin, and by that means eftablilh the Ro.
man liberty.

This was also Cato's scheme, but he pursued it not
oi precipitately; and Pompey, who could not but
know it, relied greatly on his friendfliip in cae of
mircarriage, but feared his resentment, should he fuc.
ceed. This was the reason why he never gave him
any important employ; and that, when he set out in
pursuit of Cxfar, he left Cato at Dyrrachium with the
baggage.

It must however be allowed in Pompey's jutific
tion on this last article, that Cato was not a fit person
to be present at an engagement between fellow-citi.
zens. He certainly did not want for courage ad
magnanimity; nor was any one more capable of in.
spiring the troops with ardour. This he had mad
appear, at a time when the exhortations of Porpey
and the other chiefs had proved ineffetual: For,
when it came to his turn to speak, he expatiated wil
such vehemence and enthusiasm on liberty, on thil
country, on a contempt of death, and on the aflifanc
of the Gods, protectors of jutice, that e was inter'

rupted

pted by repeated acclamations. The effet of this A R. 704.
ifcourfe was, that they performed wonders against At C.
he enemy, and gained the victory near Dyrrachium.
et this steady man, of such aultere principles, was
oft tenderly and compassionately affcted by the es-
sion of blood of his fellow-citizens. When his ex-
ortations had had all the success that could be hoped
r, at a time when every one rejoiced and triumphed
the victory, Cato Nhed tears; and lamenting the
public's misfortune to lose so many brave citizens,
urtlieled by each other, he wrapped his head in his
antle, and retired to his tent. This circumstance
ufified Pompey in not taking him with him, when
hings seemed to be drawing towards a general en-
agement.
Another illustrious person was also left at Dyrra-
hium, whose absence imported not much to affairs,
d that was Cicero: He was not well; and besides,
e was of a character which rendered him rather
ouble'ome than useful in camp. He was not only
imorous, and nothing of a soldier, but he appeared
iffatisfied, chagrined, thoughtful. and melancholy at
e miltakes of his party, which were but too obvious
one of his penetration: Nor did he confine him-
r to this silent disapprobation of their wneafures;
utfiequently in his conversation gave proof, that he
pentcd he had so far engaged, and even sometimes,
ade such revere reflecions, as could not be very
grecabe either to the situation of affairs, or to
copic's humours.
Thus, when he first arrived, being told he was
ome very late; " How late ?" fays he, " I fee no-
thing in readiness."
Mention has elsewhere been made of those AHid-
rogian deserters, to whom Pompey gave so kind a-
ception, as even to promise them the freedom of
e city. This promise gave room for a most frvere
ircafin of Cicero's on Pompey; " * What an extra-
' Hominem bellum ! Galjis civitatem promittit alienam, nobis nof.
imtnon potel reddere. MACROB. Sat. I. 3.

K 4 " ordi-

A. R. -c. c ordinary man is this ! fays he; he promises to in
Ants c. , troduce the Gauls into a city, which he canno

" reliore to its own proper inhabitants."

D iabella, Cicero's fon-in-law, had followed Cafi,'
in.cts. Pompey, intending to pique Cicero, ai
hir:., Where was his fon-in-law? "' He is," replied
Cic ro, " ith your Father-in-law."

' s eafv tojudge, that these, and many such fay.
incs, dpleafed Pompey. He complained of it, and
v.:: -lo far one time as to fay, * I wish Cicero
, w..ould co over to the enemy, that he might lea
" to fear us."

Bc:i. thus disposed to each other, 'tis to be be.
lieved this separation gave neither of them any grea
une.ncf .s; but rather, that Cicero's indisposition,
which obliged him to stay at Dyrrachium, was very
opportune.

However, if he and Cato had accompanied Pom
pey, perhaps they might have enabled him to with
:ar:d the pressing instances of all the reft, who unani.
...uiyv infited on fighting; this might have beenefr
secteo by the regard the one paid to the effusion
his countrvmen's blood, and by the timidity and dif
fidence of the other. For Pompey being left alone,
rcun.d himself too weak to oppose complaints and f.
licitations, which were almost become universal. He
was of too generous a disposition, to think of expo-
ing himfeif to the contempt of his friends; and tht'
their common safety depended on it, he had not the
heart to difontent them: This made him renounce
fcherre dictated by prudence, to pursue a plan fug-
gested by pafion, and the avarice of those which were

*Cupio ad hostes Cicero tranfeat, ut nos timeat. Id. ibid.
1T-r e .
r - ' -l -..t:i rT;_qISlf Ire errol' 'I. lfl T» Wl"t ' ta I'
eCr,: irt ,t:.s i.C'l;:r jsiix-su. PLrVT.

The tx i rrrnir. but the sense feeas to requ;re spit , as hu b
cb'ctic; in tr.c 1a Lu,.don edition.

--
4 nlt[

about him; " A fault not to be pardoned, fays Plu- A-R l 7
tarch, in a common pilot, how much less in one who A. C.
had the command of so many legions, and of so
many nations ? That physician, adds he, is com-
mended, who indulges not the irregular appetite of
his patient; and yet Pompey yielded to the desires of
a set of people whose heads were apparently turned."

Nothing could have been more suitable to Cafar's car.
inclinations. Ever since the armies had been in fight
of each other, he had been seeking an opportunity to
draw on a general engagement. His troops were now
no longer fatigued, and had also recovered from the
consternation the different ations at Dyrrachium had
thrown them into; therefore his first ftep was, to draw
out his army in order of battle at the head of his camp:,
But perceiving that this had no effe& on Pompey, who
itill maintained his post on the eminences, he each day
advanced nearer, at the fame time taking care not to
come on the very foot of the hills, left the enemy
ihould have too great an advantage over him, on ac-
count of their situation. By this condu&, which must
be allowed to be bold, but can never be reckoned rash,
he animated and gave fresh courage to his soldiers, who
were now convinced the enemy declined, and were
afraid to come to an engagement.

Ca:far's cavalry was much inferior to Pompey's:
he had but a thousand horse againfl seven thouland:
To obviate this inequality, he made use of a method,
which he had seen praftifed by the Germans, and
had been for ome time in use among the Romans,
on the like emergencies. He pick'd out the strongest
and nimblest of his foot-foldiers, and accustomed
them to fight betwen the ranks of his cavalry. By
their affiftancehis thousand horse was a match for Pom-
pey's seven thousand; and they acually got the bet-
ter in a flirmifh that happened between them.

Pompey, however, seemed to hold his rcfolution
not to quit the hills, where it was impossible for him
to be attacked. Cfar despairing to draw him to a
battle, resolved to decamp, in hopes that by fre-

quently

A.l~ quently ihifting his ground, he might the better b(
Ambc supplied with provilions; and in expetation, that a

the enemy would not fail following hims in the fr¢.
quent marches he hould make, he might perhaps
find an opportunity of attacking them, and forcing
them to fight. Accordingly the order for marching
was given, and the tents struck, when Cefar per-
ceived that Pompey's army, which had quitted their
entrenchments, had advanced further towards the
plain than usual, so that he might engage them at a
less difadvanrage: Whereupon he cried aloud to his
soldiers, " Let's no longer think of marching; now
" is the time for fighting, so long wilhed for;, let us
" not nmis the opportunity."

Pompey's real design was to draw on a battle, and
he had no other intent in advancing. This resolution
had been taken some days; and he boasted in the coun-
cil of war to put Cafar's legions to flight without
ffriking a blow: presuming, that as soon as the ar-
mies fiould be formed, his cavalry, which was ex-
ceeding good as well as numerous, by falling on the
enemy's right wing, would be able to out-fank them,
and so surround them; which must infallibly occasion
the immediate rout of that wing, and consequently of
the reft of Cefar's troops.

Labienus commended much this scheme of Pom-
pey; and that there might be no doubt of vitory,
he added a very disadvantageous description of Cx-
far's troops, pretending they were but the hado of
those old legions, which had conquered Gaul and
Germany that the old soldiers were dead by various
accidents, and had been replaced by new levies made
in a hurry in Cisalpine Gaul: Lastly, that if Caesar
had brought into Greece any remains of his veteran
tocops, they must have perished in the battle of Dyr-
ra;cium. To close this fine harangue, he took an
oath, which he proffered to all that were present, ne-
ver to return to camp otherwise than vitorious. Pom-
pey accepted it, and the reft followed his example.
This gave them great spirits as if it were as easy to

~~~~7 ~beat

eat an enemy, as to-f*ear to db it. Ins this difpo- .ARpo-.
ion, and under these advantageous circumstances, t
pompey's troops adv-riced to battle.
Pompey's order of battld was good, arnd' Well Cz. deB.

Civ. 1. IlL
udged. In the center and on the two flanks he placed plut.
all his veterans, and difiributed the ess expert be- Ponp. &
tween the wings and the maIin body. Scipio was in Appian
the center, with the legions he had brought out of Dio.
Syria. On one wing cotnmanded Lentulus, either
he who had been Confil- the preceding year, or Spin-
ther; on the other, Domitius Ahenobarbus; Pbmpey
polled himself on the left wing, because from thence
he intended to make the attack which was to gain
the day; andfetthe-fame reason he had there aflem-
bled all hi5horfe, flingirs, and: archers; of which his
right wirigt-d need, being covered by, the river
Enipeus. '.
Caesar like?4f.4ivide4;,ar-f'into three bodies,
under three commaiders, Domitius Calvinus being
in the center, Mark Anthony on the left, and on the
right P. Sylla, the fame who many years before had
been accused as an accomplice with Cataline, and
whom Cicero defended. Cfaar took his post on the
right, opposite Pompev, at the head of the tenth, his
favourite legion, which had always diftinguiffed it-
self by its bravery and affetion to its General. As he
observed the enemy's numerous horse to be all drawn
to oe pot, he guefs'd at Pompey's intention: to ob-
viate which, he made a draught of fix cohorts from
his rear line, formed them into a separate body, and
concealed them behind his right wing; with inftruc.
tions not to throw their javelins on the approach of
Pompey's hotfe, (as was cuftonrary with men of spirit,
the sooner to be able to draw their swords) but to
keep them in their hands, and push them direcly in
the faces and eyes of the enemy ; who, as they piqued
themselves on their beauty and comeliness, would be
most fenible of those fort of wounds, and the easier
put into disorder. He concluded by declaring to

them,

A. R7o4- them, that he depended principally on them for vic.
Ant. C.

. . tory.

The numbers on each fide were very unequal. I
have already more than once mentioned the great fu-
periority of Pompey's cavalry. With refpet to the
infantry, Czfar, who speaks only of the Roman troops
reckons his adversary had forty-five thousand foot,
when he himself had but twenty-two thousand. The
auxiliaries perhaps on each fide exceeded the number
of Romans: and this may have given rife to the ex
aggerated accounts of ome, who reckon three hun.
dred, and others four hundred thousand fighting men
at the battle of Pharfalia. But to confider only the
ou,-poa. national troops; what enemy, as Plutarch observes,

could have withfood seventy thousand Romans, con.
manded by Caesar and Pompey, acting with unity and
harmony ? and how great madness for so many thou-
sand citizens to turn those formidable arms againlt
each other, which had already conquered the better
part of the world, and were capable of subduing the
relf ?

Perhaps there very refletions were made by some
Philofophcrs at that very time; but it is certain the
two leaders thought quite otherwise: their thoughts
were whoily bent on conquest, and they endeavoured
to inspire their soldiers with the like sentiments, by
ADri;. the warmest and liveliest exhortations. " As you have

s, drawn this action on yourselves, said Pompey to his
" par;y, and would force me to fight, you confe-
" queitly are answerable for the success. And in-
, deed, what advantages have you not over your
" enemy vour numbers, your vigour, a late victory,

all afire a peedy and easy conquest of those broken
remains of legions, composed only of men worn out
with age, harraffed by fatigue, already beaten, and
' accultomed to fly before you. Above all, confider
the justice of your cause. You are engaged in the
: defence of liberty, supported by the laws, the Se-
" nate, the flower of the Roman Knighthood, in a

word, by every person of rank and worth, united

8 " against

c against a robber and oppressor of his country. Shew A..R.-
" then on this occasion all that ardour and detefta-. .
" tion of tyranny that Romans ought to be inspired
" with."
Cafar maintained that outward moderation, which Cafar,
he so well knew how and when to put on, and infiite'd
on nothing so strongly to his soldiers, as his frequent
and unsuccessful endeavours for peace. He appeal-
ed to them how many open steps he had taken with
this only view; hoping thereby to avoid wafting the
blood of his associates in vitory, and wishing. to
spare the Commonwealth the loss of one of thearrhies.
It is easy to perceive, what impreflion a discourse so
insinuating must make; they all wished for fight with
an ardour which was visible in their very coiuntenan-
ces: so that nothing now remained for Caxfar but to
give an order for founding the charge, which he did
accordingly.
An old soldier in his army, called Craltinus, who
had signalized himself on many occasions, began the
attack at the head of a hundred and twenty volunteers:
and turning to Cfar, " General, fays he, this
' day you shall be satisfied with my behaviour, and
" whether I live or die, I will deserve your commen-
"dations." So faying he marched up to the enemy.
Between the two armies there was an interval sus-
ficient for the onset. but Pompey had given his troops
orders to keep their ground, that Cfar's army might
have all that way to come. His scheme was, that the
enemies ranks might be broken, and themselves put
out of breath, by having tb far to run; of which dif-
order he hoped to make an advantage. Cefar, in his
Commentaries, thinks that herein Pompey committed
a mistake, and gives this good reaion for it: That
the courage of a soldier is animated by motion, where-
as, on the contrary, relt and inacivity abate his na-
tural ardour.

Celfr's sobdiers entirely defeated Pompey's hopes
by their good dlifciplinc and experience. For per-
ceving tihe enemy did not ii', they haired of their

own

.R-7+. own accord in the midft-of-he-ir carwer, ai4lajii
4t-C. taken a mo.ent's breat, .put thlenlelvYs fqcoI

time in motion, .marched qip in goodrder, .fui
their javelins, and then betook themselves to hi
swords. The fame method waso, bfCrved by P9mpey's
troops, who vigorously sustained the.atta.ck.

At this instant Prmpey's hore, ,accompnpi
the archers and flinger, attacked Cafat's, and;haiq
compelled them to give ground, began to e ]awi
themselves to the left, in order to -flank theiinf&Btq,
Whereupon Cafar gave the appointed fignl it tokI
fix cohorts, .who fell on the-enemy with futc,ffya
to give an immediate check to this seeming viotpijo
cavalry. Cfar from time to.time repeated.henqrd
he had given them, crying out, " Soldier *, Ari&
' the enemy in the face." The surprise, the-glitter.
ing of the weapons in their very eyes, the horrible dii
figuring wounds they made, all contributed to.lrilc
these young gentlemen with fuch.a panic, thatinfead
of defending themselves, they put their hands before
their faces; and being presently shamefully defeteu
not only gave ground, but fled in great diforderrto
the neighbouring mountains. The archers :and ,ing.
ers being thus abandoned were cut to pieces.

The fix cohorts, not content with this fuccefs,ijm-
mediately attacked the enemies left wing in rear.
Ca:far, perceiving the victory so far advanced, to con-
plete it, brought up his third line, which.till then
had not engaged. Pompey's infantry being thus
doubly attacked, in front by frefli troops, and in rear
by the victorious cohorts, could no longer resist, but
fled to their caip. Thus, as Cafar had foretold,
those detached colhorts were the principal means of
the vitory; which being no longer to be doubted, as
an instance of his usual clemency, he ordered quarter
to be given to ail the -i citizens, and to kill none but
foreigners: so that the grea:efl: faughter was among

Miles, feri .cilem. S.o
t Parce civibus, F OR.

Pompey's

ompeys-auxiliaries. T he Romans, having noaimngA,.i7R,.
tofear, kept their ground ,ill oied Aby the conqumr- ~.
rs, This vitory, wheesy Ce far became maaerof
he universe, co him less than molf he ad gained
vr the Gauls. It must be allowed, that on this oc-
sion Pompey was not himself; and it may be a&ed,
hat became of that famous warrior, whose youth
ad been graced by so many triumphs-?
As soon as he saw his cavalry routed, he abSlielsy
his reason. Infead of thinking how to remedy
his disorder, by rallying such as fled, or by opposing
freh traops to stop the progress of the conquerors.;
dimayed and dispirited by this -firit blow, .he re-
urned to camp, and in his tent waited the ilrue of an
vent, which 'twas his business to endeavour to ren-
der favourable. There he remained for some mo-
ments, without speaking, till being told that the
camp was attacked, " What! fays he, are we -then

p, urliied to our very entrenchments ?" And imme-
diately quitting his armour for a habit more .suitable
to his ill fortune, he privately withdrew.
The battle lasted till noon, the weather being ex-
tremely hot: Notwithstanding which, Cefar's :fol-
diers, encouraged by the example of their General,
who thought his vitory not compleat till he was:maf-
ter of the enemy's camp, boldly prepared to attack
it. They quickly carried their point, spite of the Suet.carf.
opposition of the cohorts which were left for its de- n 6Q.
fence; and particularly of a great number of Thra-
cians and other Barbarians, who made a very Aout:re-
fiftance. I take no notice of such troops as had there
fought refuge from the field of battle; they were in
too great a conifernation to think of any thing moe
than a safe retreat.
Cafar, feeing the field and camp strewed with dead,
could not but be asseted by o melancholy a prof-
pe&; and there sentiments of humanity being sup-
ported by a desire of justifying to himself and to all
prelnt, so terrible a carnage, of which he alone had
been the.caufe, he spoke there words, on the tefli-

mony

A&L 7. mony of Afinius Pollio, who that day fought for
at. c. him: "* They would have it so. Notwithstanding

' his great exploits, Cafar had been condemned, hi
"he not implored the assistance of his soldiers."

On entering Pompey's camp, Cefar perceived
repeated proofs of the blind presumption and mad.
ness of his adversaries. On all fides were to be fee
tents adorned with ivy and branches of myrtle, couche
covered with purple, and side-boards loaded with gil
and other plate; every thing gave proofs of the high
eft luxury, and seemed rather the preparatives for
banquet and rejoicings on a vitory than for a battle.

Cefar's troops might here well have expeEted some
respite; and doubtless the plunder of so rich a camp
had powerful charms: but still omething remained
to be done to render the vicory compleat. Some
considerable bodies of the conquered army having
retired to the adjacent mountains, Cfar prevailed
on his soldiers to join with him in their pursuit, in or-
der to compel them to surrender. He began by i-
closing them by a line drawn at the foot of the moun-
tain; but they quickly abandoned a post, which, for
want of water, was not tenable, and endeavoured
to reach the city of Lariffa: Whereupon Cxfar di-
viding his army, left one part in Pompey's camp, sent
back another part to his own camp, and having
four legions taken a nearer road than that by which
the enemy passed, he found means to intercept them,
and after fix miles march drew up in order of battle,
between them and the city where they thought to
shelter themselves. However, these unhappy fugitives
once more found protection from a mountain, atthe
foot of which ran a rivulet. Notwithstanding Cafar'
troops must necessarily be greatly fatigued by fight-
ing the whole day, Carfar before night had flungup
some works sufficient to prevent the enemy, who
still maintained their post on the mountain, from
* Hoc voluerunt. Tattis rebus geftis C. Cefar condeniatus cfltei
nifi ab exercitu aruiiium petiiifem. buIT. Cxf. n. 3o.

having

aving any communication with the river; as by this A. R. 7+
pthey were cut off from all hopes of relief or of Ant. c
caping, they sent deputies to the conqueror, offer-
g to urrender at discretion. Affairs continued- in
is situation all that night, of which some few Sena-
rs, who had accompanied them, took the advantage
make their escape.
At break of day they all, by Cafar's order, came
own into the pl..in, and delivered up their arms;
mbly imploring his goodnels and suing for mercy.
:ar spoke to them with great mildness, and to al-
viate their apprehensions, cited various instances of
isclemency, which he had on so many occasions
ade evident. In fact, he gave them their lives,
nd forbid his soldiers to offer them any violence, or
take any thing from them. He then sent for the
gions which had paired the night in camp, to relieve
ofe which had accompanied him in the pursuit; and
ing determined to follow Pompey, began his march)
nd arrived the fame day at Lariffa.
Cafar's loss in this great ation was no more, by his caf.
wn account, than two hundred men, (others fay Aian.
elve hundred) and thirty captains: among thefePl't
tter, he regretted, and particularly honoured Cra-
inus, whose gallantry and intrepidity, marching up
battle, has been taken notice of. This brave of-
ce, fighting regardless of danger, received a wound
the mouth from a sword, the point of which came
ut at the hind-part of his head. Cfar caused his
dy to be searched for, and having dressed and
orned it with all military decorations, he ordered a
parate tomb to be made for him, thinking it nor
ting that one, who had so well dittinguithed himfdlf
y his courage and services, hould be blended with
e common dead.
Pompey's army was compleatly defeated, the whole
rng deltroyed or difpered. The number of the
an, amongst which were forty Knights and ten Se-
ators, is reckoned by Caesar to amount to fifteen
0uland, as well Romans as auxiliaries one hundred
VOL, IX. L and

A. R. 4. and eighty colours were taken, and nine eagh
At. C. Twenty four thousand men surrendered themiel

after the battle, the greatest part of which, I me
the soldiers and subalterns, entered into Cafar's
vice. As to the Senators and Roman Knights w
fell into his hands, there is no doubt but they hadl
berty to retire whither they had a mind, or at le
had the choice of their place of exile. Dio inde
fays, that Cafar caused thole to be executed, wi
having been once pardoned, had a second time take
up arms. But the authority of this incorrect wri
ought not to have the preference to all other accou
which agree in commending Cfar's clemency,
bear testimony of his being too noble and generous
fully his victory, by the death of any one Roman
led in cool blood; and indeed I find but one
cic. ;P:. of rank named, who was killed under arms. T
Pin. vii. was Domitius Ahenobarbus, who being overtaken
3:. D;o. some hcrfemen, in his flight towards the mount

was killed, according to Cicero, by Anthony's order
Nay Cefar's generosity went so far as to burn, wi
cut reading, the letters which Pompey had recei
from several, who, not being able or willing tofol
him, were nevertheless glad to testify their inclina
and zeal for his party. " * Although, fays Scn
he was perfectly moderate in his anger, yet he rat
chose to deprive himself of the power of refen
He thought the most obliging and agreeable meth
of pardoning, was to be ignorant of the nature of
offence."
Pr:.Bru:. Among so many ats of clemency, there was one

least to which he willingly consented, and he certai
made no di;iBculty in pardoning Brutus. He had
particular affection for that young Roman, from
probability, as I have said elftv.here, of his being
son; and he always preserved a great esteem for l
mother Serviiia, even after all intrigue had ceas'd

Quamvis moderze fo!eret irafci, maluit tamen non pose. G
tilT;mum putavit genus venix, ne:cire quid quifque peccaffct.
de Ira, U. :3.

tWel

een them. He carried this affction for Brutus so A.R. 70.
r, as to recommend to his soldiers when they were A43.
oing to aion, not to kill him on any account; to
ake him prisoner in cafe he was willing to surrender,
t if he refused, to give him his liberty. Brutus,
ho had fled from Pompey's camp to Laria, wrote
Cafar from thence; who was extremely pleased at
arin from him, and ordered him to wait his com-
The Princes and foreign nations, who had taken
e party opposite to C:err's, no less experienced his
ildnefs; all those who implored his mercy got off
ra fun of money. or some such fine. It even
t the Athenians less, whom, when their deputies
me to follicit their pardon, he was content to re-
ach in the following manner: " How long," said
" having merited death by your degeneracy,
will you owe your safety to the glory of your an-
ceftors ?"
So great an event as the battle of Pharfalia could Cic. de
It fail being decorated by fonme account of prodigies, Div: .
mens and other marvellous circumstances, the effecIl. 114.
the superstition of those early times. I shall make
o mention of many trising observations, but think
ere are two remarkable facas, the one related by Ci-
ro, the other on the teitir.ony of T. Livy, which
ght not to be omitted.
Cicero relates, that whilfl he was at Dyrrachium,
rower in the fleet ihich the Rhodians ent to Pom-
's afif-ance foretold, that in less than thirty days
re would be a deluge of blood in Greece; that
yrrachium would be precipitately abandoned; that
lthe provisions in the city would be plundered and
troyed; that in their flight they would have the
inal profpe of cities in flames, and that the fleer
If would return to Rhodes. Cicero was informed
this prediction before the event; as were also
zrro and Cato, by Coponius the Rhodian Admiral,
man of sense and education. A few days after La-
eius came from Pharfalia to Dyrrachium with an

L 2 acciUlit

A- R. 704. account of Pompey's defeat, and all the circumstance
AC.c attending this misfortune, which exacly confirmed

the Rhodian rower's predictions.

'Tis not to be denied but that at first view there
is something atonilhing in the account of this pre.
diction bur on a nearer examination, Cicero himself
accounts for it very naturally: " We all know, fays
he, that the two armies were in fight of each other in
the plains of Thessaly, and were greatly apprehensive
for the success. This apprehension, without doubt,
made a strong impreflion on the rower's spirits, and
disturbed his reason. Is it then to be wondered, that
what he feared might happen when he was in his sense
he mhould presuppose in a fit of lunacy ?"
Plot. CaE. The other fat, related by Plutarch and some othe
A Gll. writers on the testimony of T. Livy, is still more ex-
XV. zS.
Div. traordinary. In Padua, a certain C. Cornelius, wi

had the reputation of great skill in the pretended
science of augury, being atually busied in cofulting
birds, knew the precise time of the battle, and told
the byflanders, that that instant he was speaking, the
two armies were engaged; then proceeding in his o
servations, he on a sudden rose up briskly and cried
with a loud voice, "C Cafar, thou art conqueror."
Every one present was under the greatest aftonilh
ment: whereupon Cornelius, taking the chaplc
which he wore from off his head, swore never to put
it on again till the exat and literal accomplifhmento
his predictions had jurtified te rules of his art. Lit
was Cornelius's countryman, and was well acquaintc
with him, and, as we are told by Plutarch, pofitivel
affirmed the fa&.

Permit me here to observe, in the first place, that
we have not this account from the first hand; an
that Plutarch, though otherwise an author of reat
credit, not being here the original, may, throughin
attention, have either altered or omitted ome ci
cumnitances which might entirely vary the cafe. I
the second place, Livy, whom Plutarch has followe
in this relation, was but in his eleventh year when ti

thin;

thing happened, which takes much from the credit A. R. 74.
of his testimony. In fine, I think it no ways repug- Ant.
nanr to the lyftem of the Christian religion to fuppole,
that the devils, whom God has sometimes permitted
to effe& wonders, to delude such as took a pleasure
in being imposed on, hould have brought from one
country to another, however distant, the knowledge
!fats the instant they happened. This seems to be
the best and only way of accounting for many like
vents, which it would be difficult ablolutely to deny.
The scattered remains of Pompey's party, after their
efeat at Pharfalia, spread themselves alrioft over the
whole earth; but he himself, as their chief, deserves
or first attention.
Pompey, who had made his escape from the camp Plut.Pom.
with few attendants, went off at first full speed; but
erceiving he was not pursued, he * slackened his
ace, and abandoned himself to the mclt melancholy
eflecions. And in truth what must be the thoughts
fa man, who after thirty-four years constant success,
n his old age was for the first time made sensible of
he disgrace of being defeated and put to flight ? How
any confiics, what wars had he not engaged in, to
t:ain that point of glory and power, which he that
nflant fell from ? What an alteration in his circum-
ances! One nloment, he appeared efcorred by an in-
nite number of men and horses, and attended by a
umerous fleet; and the next he retreats, in so mean
condition, and with so few followers, as even to
Icape the search of his enemies.
Full of these afflicting ideas, Pompey arrived at
aria; thence passing through the vale of Tempe,
r.d pursuing the course of the river Peneus, he found
R* > i7' rl ;v rL.s, t if ,
i et.;r
ti tr i,, s X C7r s
si vrgot r, l Trir-
r'.M/, idf.1i x F pr .P lr M r
PLOT Irhoic, Aj x, shrs
r-'?,tcat. PL U T.
Thre Irems here to be fomnething wanting in the text but the sense is clegr,

L 3 afifhl

AR- ;Rs a fifnerman's hut, in which he passed the night. At
At c day-break he went on board a little bark, with ficl

of his attendants as were freemen, but ent back te
slaves that had hitherto accompanied him. This ena.
bled him to get to ea; and keeping under the flore,
as there was no venturing out to ea'in so small a vef.
fel, he defcry'd a hip of some burthen, which seemed
preparing to fail. The mafler of this snip, who wu
a Roman, and was called Peticius, Plutarch tells us
had dreamt, that he saw Pompey come to him in
mean and fad plight. As he was relating this dream
to some company, a sailor came to let him know tha
he defcry'd a bark, from whence ignals were mad
to bring to. Peticius had no sooner looked thatwal
than he knew Pompey by the description he had hd
of him in his dream. He smote his head through de.
fpair, and having sent his long-boat for him, tool
him on board, together with the two Lentulus's
Favonius. He immediately weighed anchor, bu
soon after made for snore, to take in Dejotarus Ki
of Galatia, who hailed him, and made signals to
received.

The master prepared as good an entertainment
these illustrious fugitives, as his circumstances woul
admit of. When 'twas time to serve up, it bei
cuftonary with the Romans to bathe, before they
down to table, Favonius observed, that Pompey,
want of slaves, was washing himself; whereupon
made what haste he could to him, and no ways a
prehenfive of disgracing the dignity of the Pratorlhi
which he had officiated, he then, and ever after d
ing the voyage, rendered him the fame offices,
waited upon him, as his slave; and that with
frank and noble an air, that some one who saw hi
made him the application of a Greek verse, the si
nification of which is: " t Doubtless it may well
laid that every thing becomes peribns of high birthb
tr #a, CrU lanctshit antr iA.Porp

Ponpe7

Pompey, being come before Amphipolis, would -R.,70.

-··.' -A··nt. .
no enter the city, but issued a proclamation enjoining Am '
all the youth of the province to join him in arms,; Emboli.
perhaps with intent to conceal his real design of re- C
reating much further, or may be, to try if he could
not maintain his ground in Macedonia. Here he lay
one night at anchor, fending to what friends he had in
he town, and railing all the money he possibly could.
gut being informed of Ca:far's approach, he departed
with all expedition, and went to Mitylene, where he
had left his wife Cornelia, far from the clamour of
var and arms.
Cornelia expeced the news of a compleat vicory,
and had been induced to think so from the flattering
accounts ihe had received, that the battles of Dyrra-
chiuin had decided the affair. She imagined that
ompey had nothing more to do, than to pursue Ce-
ar who was no longer able to face him. Such were
her expe&ations, when a messenger arrived, who not
having spirts to pay her the usual compliment, and
whose tears, more than his words, proclaimed the
greatness of their misfortunes, advised her to dispatch,
if fle was willing to fee Pompey with but one ship,
and even that not his own. At there words, Cornelia,
whose grief became more violent, as being unexpe&ed,
fainted away, and lay a considerable time without any
figs of life. At length recovering herself, and re-
flc&inc 'twas not then the proper time to indulge her
iorrouw, ihe ran quite through the city to the sea-side.
Pompey received ler in his arms, without Ipealing a
cwrd, and thus supporting her, prevented her falling
into a-fccond fit.
Cornelia, in her despair, imputed to herself hex
hLfband's miicarriage. " The condition 1 find you
" in, said she, " 1 can never persuade rpylelf to
' Capital city of the island of Lesbos, now called Metelia.
i O.tt ct i'>io, Gia
ivi 'Tr.;: 'i{,T L *AQ
v iC ric. *Sny;IlIU stwr ri L-xhtli,
r;
ta r' Krl:/ 'Sr'-V, p
.T.I.hIiCi ' li
i ..ii
l ^ 'rad

V
.s Jttr *Jl'
iL, +. "c
ffhiL T«
; rs Js5T
rW tj *" 'i Ctrv
i pt t
"" ,
7 Cs
i- IY I «lX> i)¢ siw > > *w' s"
*ti bIel
n it eiS
l ais i f
i * t idri >iU ywv srsa.rlcs cbutias J- P '\;KWsv r tp 4,ner, Tr vrtvit
'*!',LI t/;i. sEooCaht'l ttf rat XD n.Kj rb l:'v v ri off l/ei
v rli .

L + " be

A.R. 70+. c" be the effect of your fortune, which has ever beet
LAtC. C. favourable, but rather of mine, which nevcrceafe

,e persecuting me. You are reduced to fly with

t single veflel; you, who before you wedded Cor.
" nelia, appeared on these seas commanding fivehu,
" dred fail. Why came you in search of an unfortu,
" nate wretch, why did you not rather leave me t

my ill-fortune, which I now must put you unde
, the necefiky of haring with me ? Ah ! I hould
"have been happy, had I died before my first hus.
*' band, young Crassus, perished in the Parthian war;

and I had done well, after that loss, to have quitted
" as was then my design, this miserable life! But
,, 'twas necessary I should survive that misfortu
,' and I was fatally reserved to introduce into Po.
, pey's family the ill luck that constantly attend
" me."

PonSey endeavoured to comfort her, by inftancin
the uncertainty of human affairs. " The conflan
1" success, which has hitherto attended me, has dt,
" ceived you. You relied on the continuance of t
" success; not refle&ing that- nothing is fixed l
s' certain to us weak mortals. 'Tis from this ver
s" uncertainty that I am induced once more to try l
" fortune. Since I am fallen from so great a heig4
" to the low condition you fee me in; why may 1
' not from my present lowness, remount to that gra.
«: deur which I enjoyed so many years ?"

The Mityleneans, who had great obligations o
Pompey, came and paid him the compliment of in.
iting him into their city; he declined their invita
ion, and even advised them to submit to thecon
queror, adding, with a moderation becoming hi
great foul, that they need be under no apprehensions
or Cafar was remarkable fqr his goodness and hu
pnanity.

t rC, a; #"n }smroj; d,~,rr, ~ sir .rzH ot nsis7r. 6
;tliI, It xt aMkCl r Yre« z ift o5 7it c #YOfspe .

Cratippus the philosopher came also to pay him his AnR.70.
compliments. Pompey, as it is buttoo frequent with Alt C.
persons under misfortunes, complained to him of
Providence. The Philosopher, being a man of ge-
nius who knew the world, declined entering minutely
into the matter, to avoid faying some disagreeable
truths at a time when, in common humanity, he ought
only to think of adminiftring relief to his misfortunes.
He therefore artfully changed the conversation, and
talked to Pompey of what might give him better
hopes. Had it been necessary, fays Plutarch, to en-
ter into an examination of the point-in question, Cra-
tippus might easily have said in answer to Pompey's
complaints, that the ill government of Rome had
need of absolute monarchy, as a necelTary remedy:
" And which way will you prove, might he have said
to him, that you would have made a better use of fuc-
cess, than Caesar perhaps may do ?" This is a very
judicious refletion of Plutarch, and that with which he
concludes is frill more so. " * Let's forbear this sub-
je&; whatever concerns the Divinity is beyond our
comprehension, and ought to admit of no dispute."
Pompey, having taken Cornelia with him, conti-
nued his flight, fleering towards the South-eart, and
flopping no longer than was necessary to take in pro-
visions at the ports that occurred in his passage. He
came before Rhodes; but the Rhodians, who had
sent him a noble fleet during his prosperity, would no
longer acknowledge him, now he was become unfor-
tunate. He therefore proceeded on his voyage, and
the first city he entered was Attalia in Pamphilia. He
was there joined by some ships of war, and he found
means to collect about two thousand soldiers; he had
also the fatisfation to find, that his youngest on
Sextus and about sixty Senators, who had at firfl been
separated in their flight, were united there, and had
formed an association to support their Chief.

Here he also got some intelligence of his fleet, which
Je had left in the Ionian sea. He was informed, that

'twas

A R. 74. 'twas till united under the command of Cato, whe
Ant. C. with a considerable force, was making for Afica

This occasioned Pompey to make many bitter..reflec
tions, which were but too well grounded. He lamentec
his having been compelled to leave the decidion ofbhi
fortunes to his land-army, instead of employing hi!
naval forces, wherein he had incontestably the advan.
tage of his enemies; and he thought himself f ill les
excusable, not to have taken the precaution of keep.
ing near his fleet, where, even after a defeat on land,
he might at once have found an expedient to his ill
success, and a force fuLficient to check the conquero's
progress. Certainly, in the opinion of Plutarch,
Pompey could not have committed a greater mistake,
than in separating from his fleet: nor could Cfar
have given a frcnger inflance of his address, than in
reducing his adversary to that necefity.

I have already said that Pompey had afenirbled
some soldiers, he had likewise railed some money. But
these assistances erved only to facilitate his flight, not
being sufficient to make any defence again t Cefar,
from whose known and almost incredible activity,
Pompey was in continual apprehensions of a surprise
As he had need of aa asylum, where he might have
time to recover himself, and leisure to make frei
preparations; he did not think any of the provinces
of the empire proper for his purpose, or by any
means tenable: he had every day fresh experience how
ill a reception his misfortunes procured him there;
and he had just received advice, that the people of
Antioch had decreed, on mature deliberation, not to
receive him, or any in his interest. His only remain-
ing hope was from the Kings in alliance with and
bordering on the empire. Pompey was himself in-
clined to retire to the Parthians. Others proposed
King Juba. But Theophanes, whose advice Pompey
had ever paid great attention to, made no doubtin
giving Egypt the preference, which was not very
diCrant, and whose young King would certainly refpelt
Pomrpey, s the tutor appointed him by the Senate,

and

and as his father's benefacor. Beides, is age .(he 4^. 7o*<
being then but thirteen years old, an age-of mildness Apt. c
and innocence, too early to be acquainted with giil) "'
appeared to Theophants a further reasop for confiding
in him. On the other hand, he diitrufteo the Parthi4
ans, alledging their perfidy, of which Craftus had
had fatal experience and their brutal jncontinence,
to which it would be by no means proper to expos a-
person of Cornelia's youth and virtue, whofereputa-
tion would susser by only living among people of fuck
a charater. This last 'consideration principally de-
termined Pompey; whereupon the fatal rfolution
was taken of going to Egypt. Accordingly he left
Cilicia, attended by a number of gallies and transports,
and touched at the isle of Cyprus, probably to take
in some additional reinforcement where, being in-
formed that Ptolemy was at Pelufium, he Jteered thi.
tier his course. On his arrival he cast anchor, and
sent to acquaint the young King of it, and to demand
a safe reception.
Ptolemy, who was yet a minor, had not the go.
vernment in his own hands: but he and his kingdom
vere under the diretion of ministers. Pothinus an
eunuch, who was then prime minister, immediately
afembled the council, whose principal members, anti
who were most in credit, were Theodotus of the il
of Clio, master of rhetoric to the young prince, and
Achilias, commander in chief of his forces. Such were
thejudges to whose decision Pompey submitted hip
tate: that fame Pompey, who thought it mean and
bale to owe his safety to Csfar.
The opinions were divided in the council. Grati-
tude and pity inclined tome to receive him; whilst
o:hers, more obdurate, or more timorous, were or
denying his request, and for forbidding his conming
into Egypt. Theodotus the rhetorician, as if he hd
a mind to improve the present occasion to dilplay his
eloquence, maintained, " that both proposals were
equally dangerous. That to admit him, was making
Pompey their master, and drawing on them Cfar's

resent-

.R- 7o+. resentment: and by not receiving him, they offendec
AntC. Cthe one, without obliging the other. That therefor

the only expedient left, was to give him leave to land,
and then kill him: which would be doing Cafar ser.
vice, and ridding them of any future appi-ehenfions
on Pompey's account." Nay this rhetorician, whilll
he was thus condemning to death the principal man
in the world, thought it even allowable to joke on
the occasion. For he concluded his discourse with a
trite proverb among the Greeks: "Dead dogs don't
bite."

An advice so horrid in all its circumstances was,
however, applauded; nay more, Achillas undertook
the execution of it. He took with him Septimius,
by birth a Roman, and who had formerly been a
Centurion in Pompey's troops, another Roman Cen-
turion named Salvius, and three or four guards, and
getting into a bark, made fail for Pompey's ship.

All the persons of rank who had accompanied
Pompey in his flight, were on this occasion come on
board his ship to be witnesses of what passed. But
when they saw, in lieu of the magnificent reception
Theophanes had flattered them with, a sorry fishing
boat, having on board five or fix erfons of no very
promising aspec, they began to have ome fufpici
ons, and advised Pompey to return back. Before
any thing could be determined, Achillas was come
up to them; and at the fame time the King's ships
were seen making preparations for failing, and the
whole itrand appeared lined with soldiers, so that it
was too late to retreat; and for them at that juncture
to have hewn any diffidence, would have only helped
the Egyptians to a pretence, in cafe they had any bad
intentions. Pompey therefore was determined to run
all hazards.

On their coming on board, Septimius saluted him
in Latin as his General. At the fame time Achillas,
speaking to him in Greek, invited him into the boat,
because, said he, the shallows prevented any galley's
coming up to the shore. After Pompey had taken

his

his leave of Cornelia, who wept before-hand for her A.R. 704
husband's death, he ordered two centurions, one of Ant
his freedmen named Philip, and a slave, to enter the
boat before him and as Achillas gave him his hand
to a ft him in coming out of the ihip, he turned to
his wife and son, and repeated two verses of Sophocles,
which he applied but too naturally to the present oc-
calion: signifying, that ' * whoever goes to a King's
court, immediately commences his slave, how free
soever he might be when he entered." These were
the last words he spoke to them.
The passage was pretty long from the ship to land:
and as during all that time, nobody spake to him a
single word, or shewed him the least mark of friend-
ship or refpet, Pompey had a mind to break the
silence; and looking Septimius in the face, " Me-
" thinks," said he, " I remember you to have for-

i merly served under me." Septimius gave only a
nod with his head, without uttering a word, or in-
flancing the least civility. Whereupon Pompey took
out a paper, on which he had minuted a hort Greek
Ipeech he intended to make to Ptolemy, and began
reading it.
In this manner they came near land: and Cornelia,
whose concern had never suffered her to lose fight of
her husband, began to conceive hopes, when she per-
ceived the people on the strand in a good deal of mo-
tion, as if they crouded to receive him. That in.
ftant, as Pompey rose, supporting himself on his
freedman's arm, Septimius tabbed him in the back,
and was immediately seconded by Salvius and Achil-
las. Pompey perceiving himself thus beset, covered
his face with his robe, and without faying, or doing
any thing unworthy of himfeif, he with a sigh resigned
himlltf to fate. At this fpecacle, Cornelia and her
attendants uttered the most piercing lamentations, tb
as to be heard to the very shore. But the danger they

`O* ''Orc Js Ttp Tavtt S#t^C's§ i,,them-
1i;<H' SI IoNA.@, xuv sA\^ói-.; FOAL.e

them-

. R- 7o4. themfelve 'were in allowed them little leisure ft

.t. C. their sorrows, and 'twas necessary for them to seek

their fafery in their flight. They therefore immedi.
ately weighed anchor, and the wind proving favour.
able, they escaped the pursuit of the Egyptian gal.
leys.
Vol. II. Pompey, at the time he was killed, compleated his
53. Dio. fifty-eighth year. His death happened the day pre.

ceding his birth-day, to wit, on the twenty-eighth of
September; which day he had ome years before
passed in a very different situation, in honourable tri.
umph on the reducion of the Pyrates, and the defeat
of King Mithridates.

I hail not expatiate on the many refle&ions, which
naturally arise from the circumstance of a hameful
death terminating a life spent with honour and in great
splendor. I {hall only observe, that of the three fa-
mous associates, who, to satisfy their boundless am.
bition, formed the triumviral league, Pompey is the
second, whose death has paid the forfeit of his ambi-
tion; nor will Caesar long defer paying the third tri-
bute.

I have endeavoured to draw Pompey's characer
from his aions, and the better to make it known,
have made use of such observations as have occurred to
me in the ancient writers, particularly in Cicero and
Plutarch. 'Twould therefore be a needless repetition,
if here I hould undertake to relate the portrait; per-
mit me only to recollect one single circumtance,
which is, the integrity of his manners, and the mode-
ration and decorum which always regulated his con-
du&. A virtue rarely to be met with in so corrupt
an age, and under such an affluence of fortune; but
which, such as know how to prize merit, can never
Cic. a enough eteem. And this is the character Cicero be-
At. xi. Iftows on him, in the account he fends Atticus of his

death. " I am not furprized, ays he, at the tragi-

* De Pompeii exitu mibi dubium nilnqllam suit. Tanta enin def-
pertio rerum eu;s omniurm rcguin & populorm aninuo oupara,

cal

cal end of Pompeyi Every King and all people ima- A..7Q4,
gined his affairs so desperate, that I hould have e- Ant. c
peted the like event, wherever he had chanced to
have fled. However, I can't forbear lamenting his
fall; having always known him for a man highly re-
fpectable for the integrity, purity, and dignity of hii
morals."
This moderation appeared in the tranfa&ion of all
public affairs, and prevented, even where his ambi-
tion soared the highest, his carrying things to extre-
mities, confining him in the end within the wholesome
maxims of Aristocracy. Pompey was not only the
observer, but the protetor and support of the laws
and when he took up arms against Cfar, he had thiS
particular honour, that his cause was esteemed the
cause of the Senate and of the Commonwealth. He
even left behind him an impression of esteem and ve-
neration for his memory, which procured him parti-
zans after his death, and alienated and converted into
enemies of his rival, several who had been the most
itrongly attached to his interest.
With refpe6t to his military talents and his conduct
in command, notwithstanding I find many persons pre-
judiced against him on that head, I dare not deny his
merit as a General, who, from the twenty-fourth year
of his life to the forty-fifth, conquered every enemy
that appeared before him, and who has filled Africa
Spain, Alia, and the whole Mediterranean with the
trophies of his vicories. His misfortune was to have-
had to contend with Cefar, in whose presence all mili-
tary merit, however splendid in itself, is eclipsed and-
loses its lustre.
Pompey's murderers having cut off his head, caused
it to be embalmed, the better to preserve its features,
designing it as a present to Cefar, for which they ex-
peaied to receive a considerable recompence. T11*
body was thrown naked on the firand, and exposed
ut, oiocunque veniffet, loc putarenl futurum. Non pofuliin ejus ca-
him 1no1 dolere hominem enim integrum, & caftum, & gravem cog-

7 to

A. R.70 to the view of all whose curiosity led them that wy,
At. C. However, his faithful freed-man Philip forsook it

not; but, when the crowd was a little dispersed, he
wafbed it with lea-water, and wrapp'd it up in one of
his own tunics. The next thing to be confidered was
how to burn it, according to the Roman custom. When
Philip, looking round him, perceived the wreck of a
fifhing-boat, half rotten; of which he composed a
mean miserable pile; but sufficient, fays Plutarch,
for a naked, lopped, carcase.

Whilst he was thus employed, he was accosted by
a Roman, fettled in Egypt, a man advanced in years,
who had learned his first military service under Porm
pey. " Who are you," fays he to Philip, " who

are disposed to perforin the last offices to Pompey
' the Great ?" Philip having told him the rank he
bore in life; "You shall not enjoy this honour alone,"
replied the old soldier; " permit me to harewith
" you, as a piece of good fortune, the opportunityof
"performing this aft of humanity. Nor need I now
' absolutely repine at my foreign establishment, which,
' though in many refpets very irksome, has at eat
" procured me the advantage of assisting at the obfe.
" quies of the first of Romans." In this manner was
Pompey buried.

His ahes, being collected by these two men, were
buried under a little rising earth, scraped together
with their hands, and somebody placed there the fol-
lowing inscription: " * He, who deserved to have
temples erected to his memory, has with difficulty
found a tomb." Nevertheless statues were afterwards
erected, round this mean sepulchre, to the honour of
Pompey; but in process of time, the sand, which the
lea left on the snore, buried the tomb; and the flatues
being injured by time and the inclemency of the air,
were lodged in an adjacent temple; until the Empe-
ror Adrian, in his voyage to Egypt, had the curio-
'* Ta4 gCmC ,rT t X* 7^rinc :rn5tT Tr4oCt.
Tbi word is no: nve c!ear. I have given the thought, without pretePdi11
to &ew te l;:c:l mcaring of the expreion.

fit'

ty to seek out the place, where the ahes of this A. R. 7o.
reat man were depolited; which as soon as he had An. C
und, he caused it to be cleansed, and having repaired
t, and made the way to it practicable, he replaced
he fatues.
Thele last circumstances concerning Pompey's tomb,
ou have on the testimony of Appian. According to
lutarch, care was taken to convey the alhes of her
loved spouse to Cornelia, who lodged them in her
ountry-houfe of Alba. If so, Pompey's tomb in
gypt was no more than a cenotaph.
Egypt was no less fatal to L. Lentulus, Consul of
e preceding year. He had followed Pompey at
ome distance, and arriving the day after his death, he
erceived a little pile, which yet smoked; " Who is
the wretch," fays he, " to whom are paid these
last offices? Perhaps, alas! added he, 'tis you,
great Pompey !" Immediately on his landing, he
as seized by the King's guards, imprisoned, and
ere put to death.
We have followed Pompey from his defeat at Phar-
lia to his unhappy end. 'Tis now necessary to give
rneaccount of his fleet, and what different interests
ere pursued by the most illustrious of those, who had
archcl under his banners.
I have already mentioned that his magazines were Ptit. Cat.
tDyrrachium, and that Cato had the command of& C'ic
e troops appointed to guard them. Cicero, the Dio.
ar.ed Varro, and some other Senators, had likewise, Lucan.IX.
orariou. reasons, repaired to the fame place. It
uRf be iluppofed, that the account of the battle of
ira lia pread a general conifernation among the
Otanas, in that city. They all agreed upon flight;
Ut they had not all the fame views. Cato, ever hu-
515C, ever faithful to his engagements, was resolved,
1 a f;lofion of Por.pey's death, to reconduct
'cr tiha were with him into Italy, and then to go
t a volu ntary exile, as far as polfible from tyrants
2 tvr'anny: But if Pompey was fill alive, he
':'it !iaimTf1 il under an obligation of prefcrving him

L. IX. M the

A. R. 7.c4 the troops he had received from him, and which K
Ant.c. commanded in his name. Cicero's only thought

were how to procure himself ease and tranquillity ii
Italy, under the conqueror's protection. Labienus
who had fed from the battle directly to Dyrrachium
proposed to continue,- if possible, and renew the war'
and many more were of his way of thinking. Thc
even pretended to dispute Cfar's victory, afertina
that 'twas not so compleat as was imagined: But Ci.
cero stopped their mouths by some railleries, which
the uneai situation he was in contributed to maka
more kivere. However, they all went to join the
feet, whose general rendezvous was at the isle of Cor-
cvra. At the fame place, aemb!ed the Commodore;
of the several squadrons, which had been detachedo
any enterprize; among others, one Cafiius, not he
who afrc rwards confired against Caesar, and the eldet
ion o Pompey. But this last brought not with him
the Egyptian fliTs he had had under his command;
b-in, or-izken by them, as toon as they heard of his
father's defeat.

A cc' ncil being held, Cato, an ever fcrupulou
oGbervs: of the laws, even in circumstances wher
thev had no longer the power to make themselves re-
spected, gave up the command of the fleet to Cicer,
-who had not yet declared his intention to retire. In
sac. Cicero was Conular, whereas Cato had neve
been n-ore than Priror; and further he still kept th
title and power of Proconsul, conferred on him wh
he £cr out for Cilicia, and which he had not loft, b.
caut. he hd never from that time entered Rome. B
nothin could less suit his then manner of thinkin,
than the idea of making use of this power; and inftea
of accepting the command which was offered him, he
* frankly declared, that in his opinion 'twas n
er.ough to lay aside their arms, they ought to thro
th:.: away.

* .I -, . . . pcr F hr:1lir!m praslium fuafor fuifem arnor
;:.'. - ::.. ; Jram, l ab;:ci:;dc:um. Cic. pro Dejot. n. 29.

Thi

This difcoutfe rdifed th indignation of those, ho A. R. 74.
ill continued zealous for the cause particulatl t.C
ung Pompey went so far as to draw his f*ord upoii
icero, whom he branded with the epithets of deferte
dtraytor; and had certainly run him through, had
Cato interposed, ad prevented a violence, equally
utal and unjufl. Cicero, preserved by Cato froM
oimminent danger, went to Brundufiuri, where hd
aconftrained to wait a long time for Cafar's orders
nd return, whom the affairs in Egypt gave very fe-
is employment to for feverat fmonths: But of this
re hereafter. -
Cicero's abode at Brundufiuh, was one of the Ci.ad
ot melancholy and humiliating periods of his life, Att.' X
ing all the while agitated by the frongeft appre-
enfions, in a state of dependance, having no hopes
ut from the person against whom he had been car-
ing on a war, and having reason to fear, left the
aty he had just deserted, should be in a condition
second time to make head. He made his situation
ill more intolerable, as he had done during his ex-
le, by a number of reflections, each more bitter
han te other: in vain regretting the time past, un-
er cruel apprehensions for the future, dissatisfied with
is own proceedings, and esteeming those happier and
ifcr, who had pursued a condut different from his
wn.
How opposite was his chara&er to that of Cato!
c, iteady to his resolutions, incapable of repenting
ta good aion, and having nothing to reproach him-
if with, calmly put in execution what he had be-
re determined, and with the greatest part of the fleet,
Crl n qucr of Pompey, whose unhappy end he was
e inorant o ; whilst Metellus Scipio, and the Caf-
usl have mentioned, set out to try what distant fuc-
OUrs they could raise, and to endeavour to re-eftabllfh
eir party; the one, by the assistance of Juba King
I Mauritani.a; the other, by routing the courage of
',,naces King of Pontus, to raise up in him a fresh
tcenm to Car.

M 2 Cato

A. R. 7s' Cato conje&ured that Libya or Egypt were the prm
AC, C. pereft places for Pompey to seek protetion in. He

therefore made fail for those countries, in his paffag
permitting as many to retire as shewed any inclination
to quit the party, and even landing them at the place
where they seemed desirous to go. He flopped t
Iodie Pa- the City of Patre, where he picked up Faustus Syl,
tas. Petreius, and some other fugitives from Pharfali
Dio. Then doubling the cape of Malea, and coasting the

isle of Crete, he came to Palinurus, a promontory o
the Cyrenaica. There he first heard of Pompey's
death, by his son Sextus and by Cornelia: These had
at first fled to the isle of Cyprus, but finding them.
selves too near Egypt, and fearing left they might br
chance meet with Cefar, ftcered towards the Weft,
and were by the winds drove to the fame place where
Cato had halted.

The news of this unhappy event occasioned a frel
division amongit Cato's followers. Many who wer
attached personally to Pompey, and had hitherto
held out in hopes of feeing him again at their head,
imagining all their engagements broke by his death,
eterm ined to have -rccourle to the conqueror's cle.
rnency. Cato, whole degn was to conifrain no body,
zave them fiull per.Tnion! to retire, and accordinglr
tlhev c:iiered thce;n.:ilive, wherever their interefcr
acc'-ura.n... cc ic.zr- J tlhem, till their pardon couldbe
:. aC.
C-t; i,-o sw--ards killed Caesar, was a
::. t n
t' ne oGe o tcic w, t.tojught it advifeable not

. to c-c:::'i v.; h fcrtrn!c. T e went in search of the

cc:-;uero.; L .t m':Y!':-i h::, itaid some time at
Iihoads. t-'- .is 'i;'- :;ie -_-lie-::ndrian war wascom-
Izci.ced, _ri e
' : p,?icxity :cn danger Caiar was
then m, we:e .:.cn r: ;otive oi- CasiTus to waver in
h:i deg'- . o-e-vc'r, viCiL ci ce:ermined him; and
i-: .~i hinl:lef intrcdi.ccLd to Ci-.'r, where he mer

, a L;G..?.-. !ic rcc..:ion, bein iunpported by the
:- ,'-.::.c;::on c. B;-'u:u:, v-hoie iiter he had mar-

MIan

Many others, who either despaired of pardon, or A. R. 74.
from a more generous motive, were resolved to stand ant. .
up in the defence of liberty to the last drop of their Plut.Brut.
blood, declared to Cato, that they were determined
to follow and obey him, if he would accept of the
command. This was not his firit scheme, being de-
firous to be no longer concerned in civil feuds, and
had therefore determined on a very remote retirement.
But he made a scruple of abandoning, in a strange
country, so many brave persons, whole sole depen-
dance was on his proteion: He therefore complied
I ith their requests; and no sooner appeared before
Cvrene, than he was readily received, though but
few days before the inhabitants of that city had hut
their gates against Labienus.
Cornelia returned into Italy, well knowing she had
nothing to apprehend from Cafar. Pompey's two
ions remained with Cato. We shall fee hereafter in
what manner these remains of the vanquished party
renewed the war in Africa, and exposed the conqueror
to frelh fatigues and frefi dangers. For the present
ret us return to Cefar, whom we left at Lariffa, pre-
taring to pursue Pompey.

M 3 THE

t 166]

THE
ROMAN HISTORY,

BOOK THE FORTY-FIFTH.
-C Ontaining Cadfar's war in Egypt, and

with Pharnaces. The Illyrican war,
Particular fads. The state of Rome
during Cafar's absence and at his return. Anno
Roma 704, 705.

SECT. I.
Ci;r pu-;j'les Pc,p'. Comes in figt of Alexandria, od

is pi'ned with? his eneny's head. He weeps. Ht
ei;;-s 'crx;andria, where e finds the people irritted
c,'.gi t himn. Is there detained by contrary wins.
ITkes into consideration the difference betwixt the Kin
cf Ep.' '.i;n Clepatra his Jler. The cause of til
i,; ,t,,.,r;g-',, . Discontent of the Egyptian miniters,
p,.:ic:!..r3' cf tle eunuch Pothints. Cleopatra coms
to ,lxa;:..;i-ia, and i introduced to Cafar. Their adul
teicus cc;iri.:rce. C/,rfar declares Ptoley and Clopatra
joi'ntly K:;:g a,'l, Qeen of Egypt. Acbillas with tte
' RP:al c:rn co;;es to befi:ge Caesar in Alexandria. ir
b.:t:.L'. A fire cci/f;mes the greatest part of the Alex.
c;: .:'in iba'-.. 5The war continued. Caesar caufei
Pc:hints to be affaffinaed. He is a second time ap-
wcinted Dicatori. ,Jr/Yn;. Cleopatra's ftjler, baving

inltro

:itroduced herself into Achillas's camp, procures his
death. The war carried on under the direction of the
eunuch Ganimed. Cefar in geat danger, saves him-
self by swimming. The Alexandrians demand their King
of Cefar, who returns him. Cefar receives supplies.
Aiibtridates of Pergams brings him a considerable re-
inforcement. Cefar goes to jain him. La/s battle,
wherein Piolemy is defeated and afterwards drowned in
the Nile. Reduion of Alexandria ad Egypt. bhe
Kigdon of Egypt given to Cleopatra and her second
brother. Cefar devotes himself for some time to the
charms of Cleopatra. He is obliged to quit Egypt on
the repcrt of the pregrefs of Pharnaces in Asia. Con-
cl:/i3; of the amours of Gefar and Cleopatra. Czfar
(tCles the affairs of Syria and Cilicia. Dejotarus sues
for pardon, and partly obtains it. Pharnaces, taking
advantage of the civil war to commence hojiilitief, gains
coifderable advantages. Defeats Dcmittus Calvinus,
C,efar's Lieutenant. Cefar comes and gains a vitory.
Rem, rkable faying of Cefar thereon. Total ruin and
i;,th of Pharnaces. Cefar, in his return to Rome,
ji;!tes the affairs of Asia, and raises great contributions.
iiis ;;iaxim on that head.
IESAR very justly thought, no respite ought toA.R. 74.
be allowed his vanquished enemy, whose repu- Ant. C.
adon alone was sufficient to put him in a condition 48.
frepairing his forces: As therefore he was absolutely ci. i. in'
nt on pursuing him, he marched every day as far Plut. cxf.
the body of cavalry he had with him could hold out, Appian.4
d was followed by shorter marches by a single le- iv. 1. ii.
on. He heard of Poinpey at Amphipolis; but hav-
g no hips with him, he was under the necefity of
arching by land to the straits of the Helleijornr,
.lt he might only have that fliort paflage by sea into
'.
He sent before him the troops he had brought wilh
nm; then went on board a fort of packlet-boat, and
in t' middle of the flreight, fell in with one of the
t.. :- of the contrary party, escorted by ten men of

M 4 war.

A.R.;-. war. This was L. Cassius , without doubt the fan
Ant. C. who went from Corcyra to Pontus, in order to per
Suet. Csf. fuade Pharnaces to revolt. Cefar no ways terrified
6z. Dio. to fee himself confronted by an enemy of a fuperio

force, bore up to him, and commanded him to strike
He obeyed; such was the terror of Cefar's name,
tlat, with a single sloop, he compelled ten Ihips of
war to surrender.

Cx!ar continued his route by sea, either employin
the fllips he had taken from L. Cassius, which, how.
ever, he makes no mention of in his Commentaries,
or making ufc of thote which some of the cities of
Asia had upplied him with. When he came to Ephe.
ius, he a second time saved the treasure of Diana'
t.mple, which T. Ampius Balbus was going to plun
der for Pomny. And indeed he signalized himsed
Curing the whole curie of his voyage, by ats ofge.
rcrofirt and ciemency, in pardoning as many of Pom.
pey's friens as were introduced to him, and in for
ivingr thofc people of Asia who had lent him anyaf
1'i'-nce. Onl-, as he ilood in need of supplies, he
lid them under contributions. But so far from in
ter.. i. to iarri.;ts the people, he publiflhed orders re-
iralr..:n t:c po'.eri of the collectors. I ought not
here to -c:nit for the rputation of letters, that in con-
t.. c- fiJeration or Theopoinpus the Cnidian, to who,

earnii. ar.d inl1ru cion he paid a great regard, he
gra:nt:t to the city of Cnidus, the birth-place of this
lf.gc, a tial cxenption from ail taxes and contribu

In i.is pa 1agce e v;as informned that Pompey had
it. l'een i n te ie of Cyprus, vwhich fully confirmed

!;im in w-.-at Brutus, in a diicoure between them on
this h ad, la before fugilcfLd. Cafar therefore no

S.m.c i:.c t -d n-oirn ?.i:;,ors linve taken this Cafiilu, so
i, '
, ]. ' e. :'.
~: v'1s i:l *t'.e ccl!;ilr.acv against C,-far. Freinin'-

,- : !(iii ;'v o:."- s, t l.-t the cowardice this Commoti:
·. := .:..' l:s-i i ;l thi? occa''n, hs- no means iiits the bold, llau'

.: --r or'C
- !.-':.;, r .' i]"!;iofev' ditinguifies thltm: n'
*. . .- -^. .-es ^ h ( ic ; ', .:, .:y be it-:l at the conclusion r
:. ,- ..~ .:.. ... ',- LC..lonrO

lon :

longer doubting that Egypt, where Pompey had so A. R. 704
good interest, had appeared to him the bes asylum he Ant C.
could make choice of, left Rhodes, with a convoy of
ten Rhodian gallies and a few others from Asia, having
on board two legions, but so greatly weakened, as
to make in the whole but three thousand foot and
eight hundred horse. This was but a feeble escort,
but Cacfar depended on the reputation his former ex-
ploits had gained him, for the safety of his person.
However, he did not immediately enter the port of
Alexandria; but perceiving a good deal of disorder
and tumult on the strand, he chore to lay by, till he
could know the reason of it.
Here he received a visit from Theodotus, that LUCan
vretched rhetorician, who had advised Pompey's mur- Liv. Epit.
der, and flattered himself he was now to receive his CXu.
reward, by presenting his head and ring to his enemy.
Ceflar could not refrain from tears at so melancholy a
fpetaclc, from whatever principle they might pro-
ceed. For, neither to adopt the invectives of Lucan,
nor the positiveness of Dio, who infifs that this sorrow
was counterfeit, the reflecion, which one of the
greatest French poets has put in the mouth of Corne-
lia, mult be allowed to be just:
Ojc.pirs ! 6 rfpetf ! 6o qu'il eft doux de plaindre
Lefort d'un ennei, quand il n'est plus a craindre.
CaTfar, however, took care to observe a decorum in Val. Max.
zll his actions. He highly resented the base murder- -
ing of Pompey, and having caused his head to beAPia"
burnt with the moss costly perfumes, he honoured its
ashes, by placing them in a temple, which he dedi-
cated to the Goddess Nemesis. This divinity the pa-
gans adored, as the avenger of the insolence and pride
of men when in prosperity, and of their cruelty to the
unfortunate.

* What sighs! what tears I how pleasant 'tis to grieve
That foe, when dead, who living made us tremble !

His

. R. 74. His charater seems to be deficient but in one point
An. C. In not ordering the immediate execution of the wretcj

who brought him that fatal present. By punihin{
this outrage of the Egyptians, he had nqt only avenge(
Pompey, but it may be said, had avenged himself
For undoubtedly he had hared the fame fate, if h,
had had the misfortune to be defeated. Perhaps he
thought it imprudent to carry things with so high
hand on his first arrival in a country, which was not
Ru,. in fubjetion to him. Certain it is, that Brutus had
Pomp. the honour of that piece of vengeance, who after he

had killed Cafar, caused Theodotus, who, hoped to
escape the punishment due to his crime, by concealing
himlelf in Asia, to be executed in the most cruel tor-
ments.

Cafar might reasonably look on the city of Alex.
andria as in his interest, after the sacrifice the King
of Egypt had made him. But probably the recep-
tion he gave the perbn who brought him Pompey's
head, had given a bad impreflion. Immediately on
landing, he was accosted in a clamorous manner by
the soldiers, which Ptolemy, who still continued near
Pelufium, had left to garrilon the Royal city: and he
observed that the mob appeared dissatisfied to fee the
fasces carried before him, which they interpreted a de-
gra'ation of the sovereign authority.

Caxfar took up his quarters in the palace, where he
caused a ftrie guard to be mounted. But as the mu-
tiny of the Alexandrians still continued, and as each
day produced some fresh dilsurbance, in which the
Roman soldiers were frequently insulted and ome-
times killed, he perceived his forces were not sufficient
and accordingly he ent into Asia for some of the le-
gions which he hd railed out of the remains of Pom-
pey's army ; for he had ent back his veteran troops
into Italy under the condut of Anthony: And to
appease the mob, he for several days refrained from
all business of import, amusing himself with walking
about the city, viewing and admiring the temples and
other public buildings, and even Sometimes attending

philo-

hilofophiel leCtues. In a word, he in every thing A. R. 7.
ffeed great mildness and popularity, receiving who- At C.
vr visited him with great politeness.
J don't doubt but it must appear furprizing to every
dy, as well as to myself, what could induce Caesar
o continue in this ina&ion, at a time that so many
portant affairs required his presence in Italy, in
fa, and in Africa. Pompey was dead, what then
ad Cfadr to do in Egypt? It could not be his love
or Cleopatra, fr he had not then seen her. I can
herefore find no other probable reason for his stay at
lexandria, but what he himself gives in his Com-
entaries. The Etesian winds blew at that season,
hich are directly contrary to any passage by sea from
lexandria. Cafar was therefore under the necessity
f abiding there.
This situation of Caesar proved of advantage to
any of Pompey's partizans, who having accompanied
their chief in his flight, were either now wandering in
Egypt, or had been eized by the King's order. C-
ar pardoned them all without any distinction; and in
is letters to his friends at Rome he acknowledged, that
thegreateft and most agreeable advantage he reaped
from his victory, was the having everyday an oppor-
tunity of paring the lives of some of his countrymen,
who had taken up arms against him.
Ptolemy was not at Alexandria when Cafar first
came there; but he came oon afterwards, either vo-
luntarily, or ent for by Cfar, who had a mind to
take cognizance of the dispute between this young
King and his sifter Cleopatra, concerning the right

ucceffion. This is what gave rife to that differ-
nce.
Ptolemy Auletes at his death left four children;
two Princes, who were both called Ptolemy, and two
PrinceTres, the celebrated Cleopatra and ArfinoE. By
hi will he ordered that the elder of his sons should

The Etefan winds ae o;therly winds, which conftatly blow
)-pt for a considerable tme about the summer folltice

marry

A. R. 704. marry his elder daughter, and should jointly rei{
Ant. C. with her; which was no more than customary wi

the descendants of Lagus, who had eftablilhed ali
for such associations to the crown, and for such ince
tuous marriages. For the more certain execution
this his will, he therein implored the protetion of
Roman people; and having caused two copies to b
made thereof, he ent one to be lodged in the Capi
tol, and kept the other at Alexandria. He died u
der the Consulship of Sulpicius and Marcellus, AI
Romae 701.

The union did not long subsist betwixt young Pto.
lemy and Cleopatra. That haughty, ambitious Pn.
cess had the superiority over her brother in point f
oge; for at the time of her father's death, he was [.
venreen years old, and her brother only thirteen. Sk
therefore claimed a right to govern her brother, and
to take the administration of affairs into her hands. On
the other hand, the guardians of the young Prince,
the chief of whom was Pothinus the eunuch, claimed
the sovereign authority in the King's name. This d.
'vfion fermented for some time in the Alexandrian
court, but had not as et produced any open rupture,
when Pompev's eldcft on came there to demand luc-
cours. Cleopatra even then made no scruple to fa
crince her modeflv to her ambition, and to make a
.:,-. An- tras.c of her be-.utvy. She was pleaed to find that

t' o.ng Roman wvas not insensible to her charms, and
thought, b- the proflitution of her person to his passion,
to have inlured his protection. However, he wBs
n;iftaken, as the Senate gave its determination, as
has been alreadv related, in favour of Ptolemy. The
young Prince had no fconer obtained this decree,
than he baniincd Cleopatra, who, with her sifter Ar-
finoe, retired into Syria, where he assembled an
army. Ptolemy marched to oppose her, and the two
armies were in fight of each other near mount Cailus,
at the entrance into Egypt on the Syrian fide, at the
t;r.ec Pompey came there to meet his unhappy fate.

Caefr

Caesar undertook to be arbitrator in this dispute, A. .7o4
and insisted it was his right as Consul of the Roman nt C
people, Iwho had been appointed guardians of the
Prince and Princess by their father: he therefore or-
dered them to dismiss their troops, and to come and
plead their cause before him.
Ptolemy's ministers had all the reason in the world
to apprehend such an arbitrator. Cleopatra's pre-
tensions were valid: She had been ill used by Pom-
pey's senate: lastly, mhe was handsome, and it was
well enough known what influence a fine Lady of so
complaisant a disposition would have on Caesar.
Besides, another affair alarmed them, and gave
them fresh cause of discontent. Cafar, who was in
great want of money, had applied to the King of
Egypt for a supply. He had formerly lent Ptolemy
Auletes * fevenry millions of sesterces, thirty of which s46,75.
he had afterwards excused his children the payment
of; but he insisted that the remaining forty should be
inffantly paid him: which was no easy matter.
These different considerations so exasperated Po-
thinus, that 'tis reported he even formed a design of
afflafnating Cafar: To prevent which, the Roman
General passed whole nights at table, that he might
not be surprised in the dark, or in his bed.
Whatever methods an inveterate hatred could fug-
gest, to vex and cross a person it had not the power
of destroying, Pothinus put in practice. He caused
bad corn to be delivered to the Roman soldiers, and
if any complaint was made, he said they ought to
think thcmfelves but too happy, in living at another's
expence. In all festivals, he made use of earthen
and wooden velfels, faying, that those of gold and
flver had been given in payment to Casfar. On the
fame pretence, he seized the offerings of the temples,
in hopes to make the odium of such sacrileges fall on
C2far; and which, indeed, extremely exasperated the
Egyptians, who were the moftfuperfeitious of all people.
La!v, he resolved to make use of open force, and
di'atchcd orders to Achillas, who had remained with

the

A R. 7. the army near Pelufium, to march all his fores t
At. C. Alexandria.

Cleopatra took a quite different method. Ske
complied implicitly with Cefar's orders, and dif.
banded her army; at least I don't find any mention
made afterwards of it. She also took care t6 fend
proper persons, in whom she could confide, t plead
her cause with the Roman General. But he judged
no method was so likely to succeed, as to come and
do it in person. The difficulty was how to get in
Alexandria, which her enemies were in pofefflioi of
She went on board a small vessel, and in the evening
landed near the palace. Then, in order to get in,
without any one's knowledge, she wrapped herfelfup
in a coverlet, and in this manner was carried by one
Apollodorus Siculus into the very chamber of Czfar,
Her address pleated him. Afterwards what by her
beauty, what by her graceful discourse, to which ie
joined entreaties and caresses, Cleopatra not only pro.
cured her pretensions to be allowed just, but even
brought Cafar to the point he doubtless wilhed for;
Lucan. and to be re-eftabliihed in the dignity and rank of
. X. Consort to the King of Egypt, she began by com-

mitting adultery with him, whose protecion ihe
fought.

This interview has occasioned many people to think,
that the war which immediately followed, and which
on the one hand gave the vanquished party time to
recover themselves, and on the other hand exposed
Caxfar to very great perils, was undertaken by him
wantonly, and ought to be confidered as the effe of
his amours with Cleopatra. For my part, thoughI
am far from excusing him on that article, yet the
sacs induce me to think, that Cafar beingdetained
by the Etesian winds, and engaged in the decision of
the quarrel betwixt Ptolemy and Cleopatra, was defti
rous, as an effc&t of his resolute, absolute, and impe-
rious temper, to get the better of an affair, of which,
at first, he was not aware of the consequences. Love

it

it is true had some share; but I much doubt whether A.1. 7.04
t was his principal motive. Ant. C
However, the day after Cleopatra's arrival, Ctfar Dio '
fnt for the young King, who was strangely furprized
o find his sifter with his udge. He fled from the
palace towards the market-place, crying out, that
he was betrayed; and in the excess of his grief and
pafion, plucked the diadem from his head. But he
was seized and brought back by some Roman soldiers :
However, not oon enough, to prevent the outcry he'
made, giving the alarm to the city, and occasioning a
violent edition. The Alexandrians ran in arms from
all parts to beset the palace. Caesar shewed himself
to them, and having promised to make them satis-
fiaion, called a council, at which, he, Ptolemy,.
and Cleopatra were present. He there declared, that
the Alexandrians had no cause to be alarmed; as he
intended to do no more, than what they themfelvesi
desired, to wit, to declare the brother and filler
King and Queen of Egypt, conformable to their fa-
ther's will.
Moreover Cafar promised to give the isle of Cy-
prus, which was an ancient appennage of the king-
dom of Egypt, but had since become a Roman pro-
vince, to the younger Ptolemy, and to Arfinoe, his
second sifter. Dio ascribes this bounty to the appre-
henfions Cefar was then under. But he little knew
that haughty intrepid man. No fear could ever have-
so far got the better of his courage, as to engage him;
togive up any one province from the empire. It'
seems to me more probable, that this favour was
granted in compliance to Cleopatra's request; and.
that this ambitious and designing Princess was glad
to fee an ancient dominion of her ancestors restored
to her brother and lifter; intending to seize it after-
wlrcis for her own use, as he did, the very first op-
portunity.
In the mean while, Achillas, who had been sent c{.
for by Pothinus, approached Alexandria with the

aoyal army. This army was not inconsiderable. It

amounted
6

A.R. 70,. amounted to twenty thousand effective men, many a
Ant c whom were originally Romans, brought into the coun

try by Gabienus, when he came to fettle Auletes 01
the throne, and who having afterwards married and
fettled in Alexandria, were devoted to the Ptolemean
interest. There were also some brigades raised in
Syria and Cilicia, together with a considerable num.
ber of renegade slaves, who had deserted their mar.
ters, and found protetion in Egypt by entering into
the service. Add to these two thousand cavalry, who,
during the late troubles, and the wars that ensued,
had had opportunities of inuring themselves to arms,

Cafar, who had with him only three thousand foot
and eight hundred horse, was not able to keep the
field against o numerous an army. He persuaded
Ptolemy to fend two of his principal Lords to Achil.
las, to forbid his approach. But Achillas understood
perfectly well, that these orders came from Cefar,
and not from his King; and instead of complying
with them, he flirred up his soldiers againit the de.
puties, one of wh.om was killed on the spot, and the
other dangerously wounded. Upon hearing this,
Cxfar took care to secure the King's person, the au-
thoritv of whose name would authorise his proceed-
ings, and occaficn Achilkls and his associates to-b
eiteemed fediticus and rebellious.

Achillas loai no zim.e befjre he entered Alexandria,
v.'hofe circumfrrence was cf too great an extent for
Cafar pofi;ly to defend the whole, with the fe
troops he had. So that the Egyptian General made
himlelf mrafter of the city without any difficulty, the
palace onyii exceptcd, where CEfar purposed to make
his stand. He attacked this quarter briskly, though
it was on the fide cf the harbour that the greatestef
forts were made. On that, in effe-, the vicory de-
pended. Betides t o and twenty contant guard-thips,
there were in the port fit'y gallis, irom three to five
banks of oars, which the year before had been sent
to Pompev's afnifance, and were returned since the
battle tof Pl, .alia. Ilad Achillas been once malfer

of

f these vessels, he might have cut Caesar off from all A R 70.
onmunication with the ocean, and consequently ^. '
m all hopes of receiving supplies of victuals or
ces. Thus the Egyptians in hopes of a complete
tory, and the Romans to avoid a certain ruin, e-
red themselves with incredible vigour. At length
sfar carried his point, and not only set fire to the
fels already mentioned, but to all that were in the
rlnals. The number of hips,. burnt on this occa-.H. de
on, amounted to one hundred and ten. The flames Bel.Alexr
!aft extended themselves to the Alexandrian * li-na
ary, and that valuable monument of the magnifi-:
nce of the Ptolemies, and of their taste for learn-

was almost wholly consumed.
Caesar neglected nothing that might be of advan-
Igeto him. In the heat of the a&ion~ he passed
me troops into the isle of Pharos, to take pleffion
that important post, which was the key to the
exandrian port. This little island, so famous for
e superb edifice ere&ed there by Ptolemy Philadel-
us, and which takes its name from it, was joined
the continent by a causeway of nine hundred paces,
d by a bridge. As it was situate at the entrance of
port, which was but harrow, it absolutely com-
anded it. It was therefore a masterly stroke in Cefar
take possession of it, as it enabled him to receive
e upplies he had sent for on all fides;
Notwithstanding this success, Caesar continued iri
at danger: and although Achillas had not as yet
cceeded in any one point, there was reason to ex-

he would make fresh attempts; and as he had
e superiority of forces, what he had failed in once,
might succeed in another time; Cxefar therefore
mediately flung up entrenchments, and ereted for-
cations of all kinds round his quarter, from whence
had an uninterrupted passage to the harbour. These
trenchments were of double advantage to him, both
Elegantise regum curzque egregium opus. Liv. ap. Sen. .d
l. animi, c. 9.
VOL, IX. N

A.R. 74. as to his defence, and as they prevented his bein
An. . compelled to come to a general engagement.

The Alexandrians erected works, in imitationo
the Romans, in that part of the city which belong
to them; and as they were a very * ingenious peoplt
so perfectly well copied what they saw begun by thei
enemies, that one might have mistaken their work
for the original. At the fame time they were rail
ing troops all over Egypt, arming their slaves, pro
viding themselves with military engines, and makin
arms. In a word, nothing was omitted on eitha
fide, neceffarv for the attack, or defence of a p

Achillas (as I have already said) acted in con
vwith Pothinus: and although the latter was shut
in the palace, yet the correspondence was carried
by secret messages. This intelligence was difcovere
and Cafar, having had convincing proof the
ordered Pothinus's execution; being the firfE ofPo
pey's aflaffins who had met with condign punibm
According to Plutarch, this wicked eunuch
formed the design of cutting Cafar's throat at table
and the ccnfpiracy was discovered by a slave (a b
ber) wholf exceeding timid temper prompting
to be continually upon the watch, he thought
had made some discoveries; and being confirmed
his lflpicionr, r:vealed the plot to Cxefar his rnae

WVhill: the Alexandrian war was carried on wi
the greateit heat, the year being elapsed, Cefar
ceived advice from Rome, that he had been appoin
Di.ator, not for fix months, as was customary, b
Dio. for a -ear. He took poffefion of this sovereign di

nitv, in Ptolemy's palace; and for several mont
was the only Roman magiitrate, having Mark A
thony for his General of the horse. Nevertheless
towards the end of the -ear, Calenus and Vati
were created Consuls, we will follow the Roman pr
tice, of describing the year by the names of th
who bore that office.

* Homines inre;iioFlfmi atque acutifimi, quae i nobis fieri
rant, ea folertia efficiebant, ut noftri illo um opera imitari videren
HiL d B. .lex, n. 3.

Q FUFIUS CALENUS. A R. 7o.
P. VATINIUS. AnC.
There had happened a Very extraordinary tevolu- Ca. de B.
ion in the Alexandrian army, not that Csefar's dal- Civ. 1.11
rwas thereby less imminent. It seems Arfinoi, B. Alex.
eopatra's sifter, who formerly accompanied her in
r flight, and probably returned with her to Alex-
dria, had found means, by the allffiance of Ganimed
er confident, to escape from the palace, and to get
to Achillas's camp. There ime occasioned a divi-
on. A great number of Egyptians had a favourable
gard for this Princess, who was of the blood Royal:
ut as Achillas was resolved to retain the authority,
e contest was whose bounty, or rather bribery, should
ain most on the soldiers. However, Arfinoe oon
ot a superiority; and having procured Achillas to be
alinated by Ganimed, the troops remained at her
ifpofal, the command of whom she conferred on the
urderer. He, not less bold or knowing thab his
redeceffor, signalized the beginning of his command
a well concerted, though difficult enterprise, and
hich for ome time greatly embarrafied the Romans.
Alexandria was supplied with water from the Nile,
wan artificial canal. The water of this river being
nerally muddy and unwholesome, every house in the
ty was provided with a cistern, where the water was
tin by the canal to purge itself, and thereby became
noxious and fit to drink. The canal was in that part
the city, where the Egyptians were masters: So
at to render it impossible for the Romans to hold lon-
erout, Ganimed thought he had only to taint the wa-
er in the cisterns of their quarter.
Having formed this design, he began by closing up
lithe cisterns in his quarters, then raiting the sea-
ater by wheels and other machines, he flung great
uantities of it into the Roman cisterns. Those,
hose 'houses were nearest the sea, were the first to
rceive the alteration, and were much furprized to

N 2 find

A. R. 7o. find their water salt, at the fame time that the wa
Ant.C. of the more distant houses remained frelh as befd

However, the saltness oon became general: and t
Romans were so frightened at it, that they thought
nothing but leaving the city and retreating, notwi
standing the difficulty and extreme danger of emba
ing in the face of an enemy.

Cefar comforted and encouraged them: he tl
them, " that the evil was not so great as they ia
gined: that there were always fresh springs on the
coast; and that they had but to dig to a certain d
to come at them. That a retreat was equally d
mental to their honour and their safety; and tha
they found it difficult to maintain their ground,
hind entrenchments, against a numerous enemy,
quit those entrenchments, and embark in a hurry,
consequently with confulion, was exposing themfel
to certain ruin. Lastly, that their safety depended
victory."

Having finihed this discourse, he ordered that
other work should go on, until a sufficient number
wells were dug in different places. This met with
desired fuccels, and Cafar by this means, wit
much trouble, frustrated the designs of the Egypa
which had cost them infinite labour.

Ganimed, however, was not disheartened; as
was sensible that the only means to conquer, was
prevent Cefar's receiving the reinforcements he
pecked, and which must come to him by sea, he
solved to have a fleet at any price. Cfar's fleet
not considerable, it amounted in the whole to o
thirty-four Rhodian or Asiatic vessels; five of w
were of five banks of oars, ten of four, and the
of less burthen, and the greater part without
deck. So that the Egyptian General had no
difficulty to raise a superior naval force. Accordin
he refitted the old ships which had escaped the
and ent for those which guarded the entrances oft
Nile; and of these he composed a fleet, whichwitho
reckoning the smaller veftels, confided oftwenty-f

/vrx

reat gallies, twenty-two of which were of four banks, A. R.705.
d five of five banks of oars. Ant. C.
Notwithstanding this superiority, Cefar got the ad- 47'
antage in two several engagements, through the va-
urof the Roman soldiers, and the dexterity of their
ies, and particularly of the Rhodians in working
eir hips. But another important action, which was
ught both by land and sea at the fame time, had not
e like success.
The Alexandrians had retaken the ile of Pharos,
d from thence much annoyed the Romans. Cfar
as determined to dislodge the enemy from this post;
e landed some troops in the island, and got pofleflion
f it, and of the bridge, which communicated from
he ie to the causeway. But the Alexandrians itill
emained matters of another bridge, which joined the
aufeway to the continent. The next day Cafar re-
urned to the charge; and caused this bridge to be
tacked, on one fide by some of his hips, and on the
ther fide by three cohorts, which he had posted on
e causeway. The Alexandrians fought stoutly:
heir land forces defended the head of the bridge, and
rnm their hips they discharged their arrows and
ings on the causeway. In the heat of the action,
me marines and rowers in the Roman fleet, partly
through curiosity, partly through a desire of having
some hare in the engagement, came and joined the
ombatants: but being eized with a panic, they in-
antly fled, and threw the reft into confusion. All
Cefar's endeavours to rally his forces were vain: the
whole was in confusion, and every one thought of
saving himself. In this disorder great numbers were
drowned, and many put to the sword. The loss is
computed by the ancient writer of the Alexandrian
war, at about four hundred legionary soldiers, and a
till greater number of those, whose curiosity led them
to intermeddle where they were not concerned.
It was not without great difficulty and hazard, that
Cefar himself escaped. When he saw the irreme-
diable disorder of his troops, he retired to his ship.

N3 But

A. R. 705. But as great crowds entered at the fame time wit
At. C. him, foreseeing what would happen, he jumped int(

the lea, and swam two hundred paces, to get to the
ships that lay nearest him. This precaution was not
unnecessary, for the vessel he quitted presently funk
Suet. ccf. It is remarkable that having stripped off his coat of
c.56.. Fior. mail, which would have been an incumbrance to him
Plur.ci. in fwirmning, he drew it after him by his teeth, to
Appian. prevent, if poflible, its falling into the enemy's hands:
D o. and as he had tome papers in his left hand, he con.

fiantly held it above water, at the fame time swim.
ming with his right, by which means the papers were
not wetted. However, his coat of armour got from
him, which proved of service to him: for being pur.
pie, and distinguishable by the brightness of its co.
lour, it sustained all the fury of the enemy's shot, at
the fame time that Caesar aved himself without being
observed, or known. The Alexandrians took it, and
made it the principal ornament in the trophy they
erected on the place of the engagement.
Hil. de This check, which the Romans had sustained,
B. Alcx. would have been fuffcient to discourage troops capa-

ble of fear. But there intrepid warriors were from
thence only more exasperated ; and in the sallies and
£kirmilhes which happened every day, the Alexan-
drians found them more and more terrible.

They now began to think it would be of great ser-
vice to them if they could have their King at their
head; and in order to get him out of Cafar's hands,
they had recourse to itratagem. They sent deputies
to him, with intruetions to tell him, " that the Alex-
andrians being tired of a government which ArfinoEs
lex, age, and want of lawful authority, rendered fee-
ble and precarious, and being moreover weary of the
insolence and cruelty of the eunuch Ganimed, desired
nothing so much as their King. That if they once
could fee him at their head, negotiating in their name,
and guarantee for the Romans abiding by their en-
gagements with his fubjets, they would immediatel
lay down their arms."

Cxefar, who was perfetly well acquainted with the A.R. 705.
ceiful and artful temper of the Egyptians, was not Ant. C.
be imposed on by their plausible discourse. How-
er, he determined at all events to comply wkih their
ands, being sensible that the whole hazard was to
em and their King: for as to what concerned him-
ls, if, at first, he thought it might be of service to
in to detain the young Prince, to prevent, if poffi-
e, a rebellion; now that it was not only broke out,
thad been obstinately maintained for several months,
ch a prisoner created him more trouble than real
vantage. He therefore ent for Ptolemy, and hav-
g exhorted him to put an end to the misfortunes of
is country, to save from total ruin its metropolis,
which might be esteemed one of the finest cities in
the world, and to bring back his rebellious fubjets
ttheir allegiance, he took him by the hand to con-
duc him out of the palace. The young King was
then but fifteen years old; he had nevertheless made
great progress in the lessons of dissimulation and
treachery which had been given him. He burst into
tears, and desired to fay with Cafar, protesting he
took more pleasure in his company, than in the pof-
fefiion of a crown. Such a behaviour deceived Cafar,
who was touched by his tears, which he imagined to
be sincere, and told him, if those were his real senti-
ments, they hould quickly fee one another again.
Ptolemy took his leave, and had no sooner got his
liberty, than he entirely changed his stile and con-
du&, and pushed the war with so much vigour, that
there was room to think, that the tears which he Ihed
in this conversation with Casfar were tears of joy.
About this time Caesar received a considerable re-
inforcement of troops, together with a fupp)y of am-
munition and provisions, which came to him both by
sea and land. It was already some time, that a le-
gion, composed of Pompey's veterans, had come to
him from Asia: and though at first they were drove
)y the winds on the African coast beyond Alexandria,

N ' yet

p.R .Ts.vet there is no *doubt but that Caesar afterwardl
Ant. c found means to introduce them into the city. How.

ever the convoys, in their passage to him, were w.
laid, and often surprised by the Egyptian hips, la.
tioned for that prpofe near Canopus: to prevent
which, and to dislodge these pirates, Cefar sent thi.
ther his fleet under the command of Ti. Nero h
Questor. This had the desired effe&; except tht
the Rhodian Admiral, by name Euphranor, a manof
great courage, and who had not his equal in mani
time knowledge, being too far advanced, and not
properly sustained, was surrounded by the Alexan.
drians, and funk with his {hip.
Str.bo.. But what determined the viaory, were the succours
xiI. p. brought by land to Cafar, by Mithridates of Perga-
625. i. mus. This Mithridates was of the race of the GallQ

grecian Tetrarchs, though born in the city of Perga.
mus, from whence the firname of Pergamenus has been
given him in history. His mother, who, though ft
had a husband, was nevertheless miflrcfs to Mithri.
dates the Great, was glad to pass her son for the fat
of that famous King, and accordingly gave him the
fame name. It is certain that the King of Pontus had
a great affection for that child; that, when hewas
very young, he took him with him to the field, gavc
him a princely education, and for a great number of
years, never parted from him. Mithridates of Per-
gamus, who from his birth had discovered a very
happy disposition to knowledge, could not fail making
great improvement from the lessons of so great a mai-
ter. To his natural courage he joined an uncommon
knowledge in the art military: and as he afterward
fided with Caesar, he flood the foremost in his friend.
ship, at the time he accompanied Caesar to Alexan-
dria. On the breaking out of the war, Cefarfent
him into Syria and Cilicia, to raise troops for his fr,
vice. Mithridates acquitted himself of this conmif-

* I express myself in this manner, because Cafir's continuator t'a
r.o ndice of his legions entering Alexandria.

sion

ion with great fidelity; and finding the people very fa- R. 70.
vourably disposed, he in a hort time railed a numerous ',
rmy, at te head of which he advanced towards Pe-
ufium. ntipater Hyrcan's minister, was in thisorAnq
my, with three thousand Jews, who, according to xv. 14.
he testimony of Josephus, did signal service to the, B. Jud.
omans in this expedition.
Pelufium was not able to hold out against Mithri-
ates. otwithftanding there was a strong garrison
nthe place, which was the key of Egypt on the Sy-
ian fide, it was carried by storm, the very first day of
he attack.
The horteft way from Pelufium to Alexandria, rt.
Would have been to have gone from East to Well,
eering a parallel line with the sea. But all that
ountry is traversed in such a manner by branches of
he Nile and by canals, that Mithridates found the
arch equally fatiguing and hazardous. This oblig- Joseph.
dhim to return as far as the head of the Delta, that
to fay, to the place where the Nile begins to di-
ide ifelf into two great branches. Memphis, the
ncient court of the Egyptian Kings, opened her
tes to him, and afforded him a passage over the
lile.
Ptolemy, having received advice of the approachrat.
fthis army, detached a body of troops to stop its
ogress, and to prevent its jun&ion with Caesar.
art of this detachment having outstripped the reft in
heir route, and being eager to carry off the honour of
he victory from their followers, their commanders
adean immediate disposition to attack Mithridates,
ho was well entrenched. This fault, so frequent in
ar, and so often punished by ill-fuccefs, on this oc-
aion met with its just reward. The Egyptians were
pulsed with loss, and had been entirely destroyed,
their knowledge of the country, which facilitated
eir retreat to the transports which brought them,
ad not favoured their escape. However, the re,
ainder of the detachment which had not yet engaged,
d had been joined by those who escaped the firfl de-

feat,

A.R. 70.-feat, was yet of sufficient force to prevent Mithridates's
Ant C advancing.

Cefar and the King of Egypt were both informed
of this event, and set out almost at the fame time,
the one to join Mithridates, the other to furprize and
destroy him. Though Ptolemy got there first, by
means of a great number of small vessels, which were
of use in transporting his troops, and having besides
the advantage of going dire&ly up the river, yet he
was not able to attempt any thing before Caesar's ar-
rival, who found no difficulty to join Mithridates.

Cafar, now feeing himself at the head of a power-
ful army, was resolved to put an end to the war. The
King was encamped, at a little distance from the
Nile, which sanked him on the left. Betwixt his
camp and Cefar's was a canal, of which the Alexan-
drians endeavoured to dispute the passage. However,
it was to no purpose, for Casfar passed it, and the
next day attacked and carried the King's camp sword
in hand. Great was the slaughter of the Egyptians,
Their only refuge was to get on board their transports,
and endeavour to fall down the river. Ptolemy him-
self went on board one of these vessels, which, being
over-loaded by the numbers whojumped into it, funk
to the bottom: and in this manner was the young
King drowned in the Nile. His body was afterwards
found, covered with mud, and known by the golden
cuirass, which it was customary for the Ptolemies to
wear in the time of ation.
rt. Cefar sent this cuirass to Alexandria, to be a proof
O. orof. to the inhabitants of their King's death, and himself
vi. 6. followed with his cavalry by the shortest way, being

persuaded that on the news of his vicory, every body
would submit, nor even dare to think of war. Nor
was he mistaken; for he no sooner appeared on the
enemy's fide of the town, than he perceived the Alex'
andrians coming out to meet him, and to implore his
forgiveness. Cefar comforted them, promised to treat
them with humanity, and crossed the enemy's work
to come to his own quarters.

lI

In this manner Cafar extricated himself from aA-R. os*
'war, wherein all manner of difficulties and difadvan- Ant'c
tages seemed united against him: wherein as well the
season of the year, as his situation, were adverse,
fighting in the depth of winter, and within the walls
of an artful enemy, who was well supplied with all
forts of provisions, at the fame time that he was in
want of every thing, and absolutely unprepared.
He had it now in his power to reduce Egypt to aSuet. Ce
province of the empire. Suetonius fays, that the reac' sZ.
Ibn, which dissuaded him from so doing, was, that
he was apprehensive that ome ambitious Governor,
who hould reside in so opulent a country and of so
difficult access, might some time or other be tempted
to revolt. This probably was the reason Cafar al-
ledged to his friends: The true one, without doubt,
was his love for Cleopatra. It may not, however,
be amirs to observe, that, whatever attachment he
might have for the Queen, Cafar here did no more
than an a of justice. The kingdom of Egypt was
the patrimony of Cleopatra and of her now only fur-
viving brother, and they had committed no offence to
justify their being deprived of it: So that, conformable rut.
to the will of Ptolemy Auletes, Cfar declared them
King and Queen of Egypt. It is true, the Prince,
being almost an infant, was only nominally King,
and that the whole authority remained in the hands
of his fifler, who, besides the advantage of years,
had that of being in very great esteem with the Dic-
tator.
Cleopatra's charms mufft have been very bewitching.
to have the power of retarding Cafar's activity. As-
ter having been confined nine months in Alexandria,
during which time the whole business of Rome and
Italy was at a stand, and whereby the vanquished
party found means to get strength and become for.
' Be!llm fane difficillimum geflit, neque loco, neque tempore equo,
fed hieme anni, & intra menia copiofifmi & folertiOimi hoftis, inops
Ls,' rerum omnium atlue imparatus. SUTr. Cef, c. IS.

midable

-^705. midable in Africa, Cafar, instead of quitting Egyp

7. C with all expedition, to go where honour and the as.

fairs of slate required his presence, abandoned him.
Suet. Dio. self to pleasure, and passed whole nights in feasts and
Appia. other debaucheries with Cleopatra: and at last set

out with her to make a tour round the country. They
went on board a ip richly ornamented, and took
their course up the Nile, attended by four hundred
vessels. C2far's design was to have gone into Ethio
pia, but he was prevented by his army, who bean
to dislike his proceedings.
Ht. The report of the progress of Pharnaces in Ai

roused him from this lethargy, and brought him to
himself. He at last took the resolution of leaving
Cleopatra: but before he departed, he took all the
precautions necessary for assuring her the throne hehad
put her in possession of. He took with him her sifter
Arfinoe, left that Princess should excite fresh troubles.
He likewise left in Alexandria the greatest part of the
Roman troops he had with him, in order to keep the
people in obedience and fubmiflion to the newela.
blifhed government.
SueDia. To conclude the whole relating to Cfar's amoun

with Cleopatra, it is necessary to observe, that the
Queen being delivered of a son soon after the Roman
General's departure, she called him Casfario; in or.
der that his name might imply to whom he owed his
birth. Cfar was not displeased with it : so far from
it, that he particularly acknowledged Cafario for
his son, according to the testimony of Anthony.
Though Oppius has wrote a book to prove, that the
child, which Cleopatra pretended to be Cfar's son,
in fact was not so. A notable fubje& to write on!

Cafar kept his intrigue with Cleopatra so little a
secret, that having erected a magnificent temple to
Venus, by the name of Venus Genetrix, because the
Julii looked on themselves as descended from that divi-
nity, he placed the statue of Cleopatra next to that of
the Goddess.

The

The year after Cfar's departure, Cledpatrt andA.If3.
her husband made a voyage to Rome. Cafar re- ~.
ceived them, and lodged' them in his ayn tlale, he
had them acknowledged as fovercigns, iends atil
allies to the Roman People, and paid them a1s
imaginable honours. After having gained so grea
anafcendant over Cafar, one must not be -urprize
at Anthony's infatuation and madness for this Egyp-
tian. -
Cxfar, on his return from Egypt into Syria, re- iut.
ceived advice from all hands, that every thing was ia
confusion at Rome, arid that his presence was the only
means of procuring a calm. H-lowever, he thought
it necessary to regulate the affairs of the provinces,
which lay near him, ome of which were exposed ro
the incursions of Pharnaces; and others, though they
had no foreign war to support, or to apprehend, could
not but be sensible of the shock the civil war had given
to the whole empire. The Kings and petty Princes
in and about Syria came in crowds to wait on him,
and were graciously received. Cafar recommended
to them, to be particularly careful of the safety of
the province, and lent them home extremely well as-
feed to him and to the Roman people. He also Jof.Antiq.
confirmed Hyrcan in the High-priefthood of the Jews, xlv. is.
maugre the r:prefentations of Antigonus ion of Ariflo- d'' &
bulus, and gave them leave to rebuild the walls of Je- Jud.. 7. .
rufle:m, which Pompey had ordered to be pulled
down. He likewise supported Antipater, in the com-
mrand he had for a long time exercised in Judea, under
yvrcan's name, which greatly strengthened the au-
thority of that Prince.
From Syria Caesar went by sea into Cilicia, andHlrt.
having convened the fates of the province in the city
Of Trfus, he prepared to go towards Pontus, which
Pharnaces had seized, in the manner as lhall be pre-
fently related.
When he came to Comana, he deprived ArchelausAppian.
(the ftn of him whom Pompey had invested with-
this cice) of the Priesthood of Bellona. This high

a dig-

Al, o70. dignity, of which I have elsewhere spoken, was by
ant. C. him conferred on Lycomedes, or Nicomedes of Bi.

' thynia, who, according to the testimony of the writer

of the Alexandrian war, claimed it in right of his An.
celfors. This however might be only a specious pre.
tence, which served to cover an a of vengeance
against Archelaus, who was one of Pompey's parti-
zans, and to give Cefar an opportunity of rewarding
the services done him by Lycomedes.
Bart On his approaching the frontiers of Gallo-gracia,

he was met by .Dejotarus, who had not only divefled
himself of all marks of royalty, but appeared as a
suppliant, and a person charged with ome heavy ac-
cufation. He had assumed this outward humility,
knowing that C2far was greatly incensed against him,
and had therefore taken all polnible means, to secure
to himself ome powerful intercessors. He exculed
himself but very indifferently for having taken par
with Pompey. He said, that being in a country
where they knew no other authority than Pompey's,
and where Cafar had then neither troops, nor any re-
presentative, he was compelled to obey him, under
whose command he happened to fall. Whereas in
truth, he had fided with Pompey through affecion and
a perfuaflon of the justice of his cause.

Caesar, to refute him, made use of as bad reafliis
as those which the Galatian Prince brought in his de-
fence. He pretended that Dejocarus had certainly
been fa lty in regard to him, because he could not
but know that he was the person, whose power Rome
and all Italy acknowledged, and who was auallyin-
vested with the Confulflip at the time of the battle
of Pharfalia. As if the violence, with which he had
seized te empire, and had afterwards invaded the
Consulship, had een a lavful title, whose authority
ought to have been rcfpected by all the Roman Al-
lies. But in the mouth of the stronger, all reasons
are valid.

However, Cafar observed his usual moderation,
He declared to Dejortrus, that he forgave him, that

is to fay, that he would offer no violence to his per- A.R. 7jo;
son: he ordered him to resume his robes, and required Ant. C.
a legion for the war against Pharnaces, formed on
the Roman discipline. But he reserved to himself the
right of determining, after the war, the. contestations
between him and the other Tetrarchs. This was one
ftep towards stripping him of the greatest part of his
dominions.
Ca far was no sooner come into Pontus, than he re-
ceived a deputation from Pharnaces, of whose motions
it is time to give some account.
This Prince, the parricide son of Mithridates, at Appan
first esteemed himself very happy, to be acknow- Mthrid.
ledged by Pompey, King of the Bosphorus, and to be XLi.
ftiled friend and ally of the Roman people. But, on Hirt.
the breaking out of the civil war, this opportunity
awakened his ambition; and whilst the Romans were
employing their forces to their mutual destruction, he
flattered himself with the hopes of reconquering the
dominions of his ancestors, and which he still looked
upon as his patrimony. He began by taking Phana-
gorea, a city lying beyond the Bosphorus, which
Pompey had declared free: He next subdued Colchis;
then entering Pontus, he made himself maifer of Si-
nope, which had formerly been the residence of the
Kings his ancestors. Elated by this success, he at-
tacked the Lesser Armenia, which actually belonged to
Dejotarus, and in the absence of that Prince, easily
conquered it. Lastly, he carried his arms into Cap-
padocia, and attempted to take that kingdom from
Ariobarzanes.
Dejotarus found affairs in this situation, on his re-
turn after the battle of Pharfalia. Cafar was at Alex-
andria, very much embarrassed, and in very great
danger. Domitius Calvinus, by him appointed to
take care of the affairs in Asia and the adjacent pro-
vinces, was the only resource Dejotarus could apply to,
as his own forces were not sufficient to stop the pro
grels of Pharnaces.

Cefar's

A.R. 705. Cefar's Lieutenant was very sensible that the Ri

m. C. man people were not less interested in this war thi

Dejotarus and Ariobarzanes. He sent orders to Pfh
naces immediately to evacuate the Lesser Armenia a
Cappadocia; and not to make an ill use of the fiu.
ation the Roman people were then in, by not payi
them a proper respect, or by offering violence
their right and authority. So imperious a declaa
tien had need to be backed by force. Donitius l
the command of three legions, but he had ba
obliged to fend two of them to Cafar's afiftance;
one by ea, the other by land. To the remaining 0o
he added two others, composed of Galatians, a1
other subjects of Dejotarus, armed and disciplined
that Prince, after the Roman manner; and a fourt,
which was just raised in a hurry in the kingdomd
Pontus. With these four legions, and some oitd
auxiliary troops, he advanced as far as Nicopolis i
the Lesser Armenia.

Pharnaces had to no purpose endeavoured toamu
-him with a negotiation, and by fending deputies as
deputies, to define things might remain as they wt
till Cffar's arrival. By this he only meant to g
time, knowing Cefar's dangerous situation in Alex
andria. He had likewise intercepted ome letter,
wherein Domitius was ordered to come to Egypt, b
the route of Syria. And not doubting but that Ceas
Lieutenant would immediately leave the country,
delay and protration of affairs to him was equal to 4
victory.

With this view, and to avoid coming to an engage
ment, or at least not to fight but on advantageo
terms, he drew from the city of Nicopolis, und
where walls he was polled, towards the Roman camp
two paallel ditches, at a moderate distance from eac
other, each four foot deep. Between these two line
-he drew up his infantry in order of battle. As fr
his cavalry, as it could not possibly at in so confine
a space, and being moreover superior to that of te

Romans

omans, he placed them on the flanks, without the A.Ro.7i
tches.Ant.
Domitius, for the very reasons which induced
arnaces to be on the defensive, was very defirQu
come to aion, and the disadvantage which hip
*ps must be exposed to, in attacking te enemy in
h a situation, was to him no obffacle. But not
ing sufficient capaity to condu& such an attack,
dbeing more bold, than knowing, in the art of
rhe was defeated by Pharnaces. ejotarus's two
ions gave ground at the yery first onfe, and im-
dately run away. The legion raised in Pontus was
oft totally cut to pieced. That, which was com-
ed of Ponpey's veterans, futained the whole brunt
the acion, and retreated in good order, with the
of only two hundred and fifty men.
By this viatory, Pharnaces became absolute matier
the Lesser Armenia, of Cappadocia, and of Ponts.
rnitiu, who was no longer able to keep the field,
mbled in the best manner he could, the remains of
army, and retired into Asia. The conqueror
e an ill use of his prosperity, and by the several
of power, cruelty and oppression which he corn-
ied, seemed to endeavour to make his government
US5.
e was making dispositions to push his conquest
far as Bithynia, and the province of Asia, when
received advice, that Afander, whom he had ap-
ited Regent of the Bosphorus during his absence,
revolted. This obliged him to alter his plan,
to think of reducing that rebel. Whillt this bu-
employed his attention, he was traversed by ano-
of greater importance; and he had intelligence of
approach of a more formidable enemy; which was
. Pharnaces rightly judged, that his first con-
was to endeavour to put a flop to him; and ac-
ingly he posted himself on an eminence near Zela
ica in Pontus, which place he thought of happy
n, because his Father had there defeated the Ro-
rs commanded by Triarius.
oL. IX. 0 He

A. R. 705. He observed the fame condu& with Caesar, as hd
Ant. C. succeeded with Domitius. He pretended to sues

peace, at the fame time that he was strongly
trenched, and fully resolved to continue the war.
sent Ambafladors to Cxfar, with inftru&ions, to
sent him with a crown of gold, and at the fame ti
to declare his entire submission to his will. And a
proof that he did not deserve to be treated as anenem
he strenuously insisted on his not having given any
fiftance to Pompey.

Cefar replied, that particular services were to
no compensation for offences committed againfi
republic: and that after all, he had only served him
in not engaging with a ruined party. He added,
was willing to pardon him, provided he would q
Pontus, and repair the damages he had there oc
sioned. He refuted to accept the golden crown, fay
that Pharnaces ought firef to return to his allegia
and then he might fend him such presents, asit
customary for vicorious Generals to receive from t
friends.

This artful Prince promised every thing, but n
meant to keep his engagements. As he knew
of the utmost importance, and which would admit
no delay, required Cfar's pretence at Romt,
thought by shuffling, and starting difficulties a
thie m;anner and time of fulfilling his engagements,
tire out Cfar's patience: and that in the end
General, satisfied with having a fair pretence to
Pontus, would choose to go where his preencews
requiite.

Cxfar easily aw through Pharnaces's design:
inftcad of losing time in cavilling, he resolved to
an end to the affair, and to determine the war b
battle: To this resolution, his natural activity
the necessity of circumstances not a little contribu
However, his forces were very inconsiderable;
had only the sixth legion, (which he had brought
hm from Alexandria, and which, by long fe
fatiguing marches and frequent aions, was red

to less than a thousand men), one legion of Dejotarus, A.R. o5.
and two others, which had been lately beaten under A c'
Domitius. But he knew, that such a leader as him-
self was worth a whole army. He advanced there-
ore with these troops, within five miles of the enemy.
The country where Pharnaces was encamped was
ull of hills separated from each other by deep valies.
ppofite the hill where the King of Bosphorus lay,
only a mile's distance, was another on which Cafar
eflved to take his post, and- to entrench himself.
ith this view, he ordered a large collection to be
ade of fascines, branches of trees, sones, and all
rts of materials necessary for raising a rampart:
hich order being in a short time executed, he matched
ith his legions three hours before day-light without
nv baggage: and at fun-rifing, to the great furprize
f the enemy, had got poffeflion of the hill he had
adechoice of for his post, and which was the very
ace where Triarius had been defeated by Mithri-
ates. In a short time all the slaves, which had fol-
wed his army, brought up the materials for the ram-
art; and whilst the first line of the Roman troops
ade a front towards the enemy encamped on the op-
site hill, the reft of the soldiers worked hard at the
trenchment.
Pharnaces, who saw his whole proceeding, imme-
iately dres out his army in order of battle at the
ad of his camp Cafar looked on this as a bra-
ado, not imagining any mortal could be hardy
ugh to bring troops down into a valley, who must
erwards ascend a very steep hill, before they could
tack him. Pharnaces, through a prefumpti:;n of
hich it is to no purpose to seek the motive, dared at-
pt what Cefar thought impracticable, and made
motion with such celerity, that he furprized the
|man s who perceived the enemy just upon them,
lift they were yet employed at their work. So that
tar had not only his workmen to call in, but to
er them to arms, and to draw them up in order of
tt. All this could not be done, at once, without

0 2 so ne

A. R. 705. some disorder, which was augmented by feeing th
Ant. C chariots armed with scythes, which marched in t

47' front of Pharnaces's army. But the Romans soon rn

covered themselves fom this confusion, and aided bI
their advantageous situation, easily repulsed the enemy,
The victory begun by the right wing, where the Te
terans of the sixth legion were potled. Soon afte
the left and center had the fame superiority. Pi4
naces's soldiers were either slain or thrown headk
into the valley. Those who escaped the battle lu
away their arms, that they might not impede
flight. Cefar pursued them, and without gi
them time to rally, attacked their camp andforced
During the attack of the camp, Pharnaces so
means to escape.
Appian. It is reported that Caesar himself was aftonifed

the ease with which he gained this vi&tory, and
pressed himself in the following manner: "Hap
Pompey ! such then are the enemies, by whosed
you have acquired the appellation of Great."

In a letter to one of his friends at Rome giving
account of this action, he described the rapidityof
vitory, by these three remarkable words V
VIDI, vici: I came, saw, and conquered. Andw
he triumphed on this occasion, he caused a tablt
be carried in the procession, with these very wordsi
fcribed on it in capitals.
Appian. In effect Cafar might well boast to have compl
Tlitli:i. subdued his enemy by the gain of this single battle

for by it he put an end to the war. Pharnaces hav
retired to Sinope, was pursued thither by Domit
who compelled him to quit that city, and soon a
the whole country. Through his foolish ambi
he now found he had no place left, where to f
protection. For the Bosphorus was in the hands
Afander, who had revolted, as has been related.
that when this fugitive Prince was disposed to re
home to his kingdom, he found the rebel in a condi
to dispute him the poffellion. This drew on a ba

where
!

herein Pharnaces was slain. Such was the end of all A. R. 7s5.
is ambitious projecs. Ant
Cefar, at last at liberty to return to Rome, loft no firt.
re after the vi&ory over Pharnaces. He fee out
e very next day, escorted by a party of horse, or-
ring the ixth legion to follow him, and receive in
y the reward due to soldiers, who had done so
uch and such great services for their General. In
ing through Gallo-gracia and Bithynia, he fettled
e affairs of the Princes, and inhabitants of those
untries: and it was then he took his revenge on
jotarus, to whom, according to Cicero, he had a cic. Phil.
rfonal hatred. He exated large fums of money U. 9, 9s.
m him: took from him Armenia, which the Se-
e had given him, and bestowed iton Ariobarzanes:
alfoftripped him of part of Gallo-graecia, and made
present of it to Mithridates of Pergamus. This Dio.
e Mithridates was by him ordered to make war on
sander, and appointed King of the Bosphorus, when
had conquered it.
We know not particularly, what other regulations
far made, with respect to all those countries and
th refpe& to Aia properly so called. We only
ow, that his great application was to raise money
all forts of means. He caused payment to be
ade of those fums of money, which had been pro-
fed Pompey, exacting at the fame time fresh ones
various pretences. He made no scruple to plun-
temples, and received a great number of golden
wns from the Princes and inhabitants of different
ties and countries. In this he only stuck to his
iciples, of which he made no secret: faying,
There are two expedients absolutely neceffzary for
ablilhing and confirming a government, soldiers
d money: And thee two expedients mutually afflTt

other. By money, soldiers are raised, and fe-
red to your interest; and by the soldiers arms,
ey is levied: and if either of these expedients
, the other cannot long subsist." Such were his

hts, and such was his discourse, which implied.

0 3 no

A. R 70s. no more than the truth; but which to be lawfully
At. c. in practice, supposes it ro be done by a legal author
+7- and to some lawful end.

Cafar, having with his usual application d
patched all the affairs which detained him in d
Eallern countries, hurried away for Italy, wher
arrived sooner than was expeted. But before I e
the relation of his tranfations there, it is necefar
me to take notice of several events, which have
yet found place in my narration. In the fir pl
therefore, I shall give an account of the war in I
ricum, between the two factions which then div
the empire: In the next place, I shall relate some
ticular racts, which concern some Romans of diti
tion and certain people of Greece. And shall
giving any account of the increase of the vanqui
party in Africa, and of the commotions in Spain,
till it flall be necessary for me to speak of Cefar's
in those two provinces.

SECT. II.
-e ar in I'.(, icum between the partizans of Cefar
Pi;;pc,. Ca.enms takes Athens, Megara and P

,.s, for CJfar. Deatb of Appius Claudius.
d. sicn cf te Pytbian Oracle. Sulpicius andMa
ius rmake c oi e of a vcluntary exile. Cornfanc of M
ce'ius. Cicero is ill treated by his brother artd
A;; accuc;t of Cicero's disquietudes during his sl

-utae ur . He goes to Cefar, and is favourabó
e:'ed. State f Rome after te battle of Pbarf
C.-,:r cppcintfd Diltalor, and M. Anthcny Gextrd
t:i b;.e. ii';ccnduSl cf Anthony. His rapin
;:;jlice. Co:vm.;icns in Rome occa/foned by De
tAc T'r'bl;:e. Carfar, on his return to Reme,
b. fe trc::ci.s, witbout examining into paftfas.
fjr end:'avo!;-s to raise mon:y at any rate. He
a ,7r cf tbh efefts of the defeated party, parti
Poviy,'j, wb.,b are bought by Anthony. Dfitt

betwixt Ce/ar and Anthony on this bead. Cefar in-
gratiates him/elf wit; the people. Rewards the leaders
of bis party. Calenus and Vatinius appointed Conjuls.
Cefar cau/es him/elf to be nominated Listator and Con-
fulflr the ensuing year, and takes Lepidus for his Col-
Itue in the Conjul/hip, and for his General of the horse.
Sedition among the Veteran soldiers. Cefar appeases
it y his rejolution. Tbe principles of his ondu in
regard to his soldiers.

E have seen that Pompey's party was too A. R. 70.
itrong for Cafar's in lilyricum. However, Ant C.
e city of Salona the capital of the country withstood cf7de B.
e torrent, and even maintained a siege against M. 01. 11. 9.
)avius. This Lieutenant of Pompey, who, with
he alfitance of Libo, had drove out Dolabella, and
n C. Antonius prisoner, endeavoured at first to
ruade the Romans, ettled in Salona, and mailers
fthe place, to open the gates to him. But not be-
,g able to succeed, he resolved to attack the city and
ke it by storm. The Romans, who defended it,
re determined, notwithitanding their few numbers,
aabLde all extremities, sooner than forfeit their fide-
yto Czefar; and rather than surrender, they set at
berty all their slaves capable of bearing arms, and
toff their women's hair, to make use of it in their
nines of war.
Ofavius, perceiving their obitinacy, besieged the
ityi form, and formed five camps round Salon<.
he besieged made a vigorous defence: and although
ty were in great want of provisions, they held out
ra considerable time. Until one day about noon,
berving that Oavius's soldiers were not at their
Ots, and seemed remiss in their duty, they diftribu-
ed their women and children round the walls, to
ake a false show to the enemy; at the fame time
at they themselves, supported by the slaves to whom
ey had given freedom, made so vigorous and well-
nduEted a ally, that they carried Ocavius's five
amps, one after the other. This obliged him to

0 4 raise

A- R 7c. raise the siege: So making what hafthe heotfi t h
Ant. c. {hips with the broken remains of his trps, he rt
47' turned to Epirus. This affair happened *hile POm

was yet at Dyrrachium.

The Romans of Salonra had applied t6 CIt, dm
ing the liege, for a reinfortcemient, but he hid o
been able to fend them any. The futmeri fdll6nwi
the fame in which he engaged Potipey, Cortifid
came by his order into Illyricum, with to klegf
He there had a double war to carry on, with the
tives, and with M. Otavius, who after the batte
Pharfalia, had returned into the gulph with his f
and endeavoured to draw over to his party, the inl
bitants of the little isles, and of the coastS of llyric
Cornificius, by a condu& equally a&ive and prude
continually gained ome advantage over the tw
f6ld enemies.

When Cafar was in pursuit of Pompey, hewas
formed that several of the vanquished party had flu
themselves, in great bodies, into Illyricum, on
fide of Macedonia. He was apprehensive that th
there might become powerful, and imagined, t
Cornificius had need of a reinforcement. He the
fore ordered Gabinius to march into that province wi
omre new raised legions. Gabinius was one of P
pey's creatures, but had joined Caesar in acknowl
ment for having recalled him from exile, by the h
passed in his first Di&atorfhip. Though his pncipl
were bad, he nevertheless was brave, but he mi
tained not on this occasion the reputation he had
merly acquired in Syria and in Egypt; andat
fame time his hopes began to flatter him, and so
seemed inclined to favour him, he met, in Illyri
with infamy, and death.

Illyricum being a barren country, it was nt
easy matter for Gabinius to fubfif n rfty t
especially as the inhabitants were no friends to C
party. It was.then the most rigid time of the
and the winter, beides incommoding the troops
its severe cold, preventcd any convoys tonlitg byf

Gab

*Gbiius, having to contend with all these difficulttie, A.. 7'S
Iade several attempts, and as often failed: he attacked ^ .
atles garrisoned by the Barbarians, and was repulsed
with loss. The consequence of which was, that he
b came contemptible to his enemies; o that when he
returned t Salon they attacked his army, beat him,
Ihd killed a grett number of his people. Gabinius,
hving retired into the city with the remains of his de-
feat, was there seized with a distemper of which he
fooh after died.
By his defeat and death, O&avius became absolute
inthe province. His fleet commanded at sea: and
the natives of the country were his friends. Cornifi-
tius prefied oh all fides with difficulty kept his ground,
and Cafar, then hut up in Alexandria, was at too
reat a distance, and too much employed, to think of
llyricum. The only resource for Caesar's party in
this country, was a man, who has hitherto appeared in
history, as a person of a mean foul, and depraved mo-
nals, but who nevertheless was of great intrepidity,
and understood peffe&ly well the art of war.
The man I mean is Vatinius; who was then at
Brundufium; and being applied to by Cornificius to
come to his afliftance, notwithstanding an indifpoition
he then laboured under, undertook and executed this
expedition, with a resolution truly commendable. He
had with him a good number of veteran soldiers, who
had been left behind at Brundufium, on account of
Iicknefs, at the time Cafar's legions went into Greece.
But he wanted ships, or at least he had not sufficient
to form a fleet capable of engaging Otavius: Where-
upon he wrote to Fufius Calenus, whom Caesar had
ft in Achaia, to fend him as many as he bad occa-
sion for; but this supply not coming so soon as the
exigence of affairs required, he determined to make
use of such as he had. To some large ships of war,
whtch were in the port of Brundufium, he made an
addition of great numbers of small veftels. which he
umed with beaks: and on board this fleet, composed

in

.R. 7cs. in this manner, he embarked his veteran troops, and
AtC. gave chace to Oaavius.

This latter atually fled from Vatinius, and even
railed the siege of Epidaurus, which was then begun.
But having had information of the strength of the
enemy's secet, and knowing his own to be far fupe.
rior in number and rate of ships, he halted i a pon
of a little island called Tauris, and made all the ne.
cefary difpoficions for an engagement. As'Vatinius
pursued his course, he saw, all on a sudden, O&avius's
fleet coming out of harbour in line of battle.

Surprised he was, but not disconcerted: he imme.
diately gave the ignal for fight; and being sensible
that his ships could not engage the enemy's but at
great disadvantage, he determined to reit the afai
entirely on courage, and accordingly ordered the
ga.lcy on which he was aboard, and which was of
five banks of cars, to attack the Admiral-galley ofthe
enemy. In the sirs shock, which was very violent,
Ocavius's galley ft its beak. Immediately the vef
iels of both parties moved up to the assistance of their
Chiefs, anJ as they closed in on all fides, therewas
no longer pffibilicy of working any of them. It was
now a clufe engagement, and nothing could have hap
pened more favourable for Vatinius's soldiers, we
bravery and experience aifured them victory, as soon
as they could have an opportunity of boarding. Oc
tavius's galley was funk; many others shared the fan
fare, or were taken ; numbers of his soldiers werekill
ed or drowned; and it was with difficulty that he him
self escaped with some few ships. Vatinius, afterth
victorv, went to refresh himfeif in the port, whic
OLtavius had just quitted.

This vitorv was decisive. O&avius fled toth
coast of Greece, from whence he went to Sicily, an
afterwards into Africa. No vessel under Pompey
colours dared appear in the Adriatic: and the p
vince of Illyricum obeyed the laws of Cafar, and th
orders of Cornificius. Vatinius after this gloriousex
ploit returned to Brundufium, without the loss ot

finj

single {hip, or even, if you take literally the expreflion A. R.i7
of the ancient historian, of a * single man. At.
In Greece, the Athenians and Megarians had with Dio.
difficulty received Cafar's yoke. This General, ere App'an
the battle of Pharfalia had been fought, had sent
Fufius Calenus, at the head of a considerable detach-
ment, to make war against Pompey's Lieutenants,
who were in polfefion of the Southern provinces.
Fufius would have been glad to have penetrated into
Peloponnefus ; but Rutilius Lupus, one of the Chiefs
of the contrary party, having taken the precaution to
raise a wall cross the Isthmus, Fufius went and laid
siege to Athens, and immediately took the Pireeus,
whose fortifications had been raised by Sylla. Never-
thelefs the Athenians were so obstinately -set against
Cxfar, that they still held out, till hearing of Pom-
pey's defeat, they opened their gates to Calenus.
CIfar, whose clemency they implored by their de-
puties, pardoned them, not without reproaching
them in the following manner: " t Must you ever
" be indebted to the glory of your ancestors, for pro-
"tefing you from a punihment, which your own
ations have incurred ?"
The inhabitants of Megara should have followed
the example of the Athenians, in their fubmiflion.
But, to their misfortune, they were obstinate enough
to stand a siege. After a pretty long resistance, per- Plut.Brut.
ceiving the enemy intended to storm the city, they
thought of letting loose ome lions, which Calflus
had left to be taken care of in their city, till he hould
fend for them to Rome, for the games he intended
to give on his being chore.: ZEdile which office he
then made application for. But the lions were no
sooner at liberty than, instead of seizing Calenus's
soldiers, they turned on the Megarians themselves,
and tore several of them to pieces, o that they be-
tame objects of compafion and horror to their very

Stis omnibus incolumibus.
At n;(d',I is rt oEuar ee ; 5amM/fint ; J« tr
lyl w ir ioty .

enemies.

. rt s. enemies. The reft of the inhabitants were fold t(

cLt. slavery. But Calens had so much confideratio and

compassion for them, as to fell them to buyers h0
had ome friendship for them, ad that at a ve
moderate price; to the intent that thee unfortunate
Megarians might have it in their power to rahfoi
themselves, and that so ancient and illustrious a city
might be able to recover itself.

Cafar's victory at Pharfalia opened a passage for
Calenus into Peloponnefus. He marched toward
Patra, where Cato, as I have already mentioned
after leaving the isle of Corcyra, had brought the
chief part of Pompey's fleet. On his approach
Cato retired: and Calenus met with no further op
position throughout all Greece.

I have only now to take notice of ome particular
facts, which ought not to be passed over in silence.
And the first of this kind which occurs to me, is the
death of Appius Claudius. A man more eminenton
account of his rank and family, than for his merit,
but whose high birth has given him a place among
! the molt illustrious citizens of Rome. He had foM-
v. lowed Pompey, whose eldest son had married hi

daughter, and had been deputed by that General, at
the commencement of the war, to command in Achai.
Appius, being very uneasy, and apprehending a ret
verse of fortune, more on his own account, than in
consideration of the cause he had espoused, deter-
mined to consult the oracle at Delphos, on the fuc-
cess of the war. He had even been addicted to divi-
nation in all its branches, and had made a serious itudy
of this pretended science. The difficulty here was to
make the Pythia speak. For the oracle had been fb
long negle&ted, and the Priestess got so little honour
and profit by the exercise of her function, that it waI
not worth her while to expose herself to the fatigue
and danger of the frantic rage, which the exhalations
of the grot of Apollo excited in her. She therefore
refused to enter the cave, and to place herself on te
Tripod, till Appius made use of his authority, and

con-

compelled her to a compliance. Whereupon the re- .A. 7s.
turned him this answer: " M Roman, this waS i; nqole '
, of your concern i you mill obtain the courym of
"Euboa" This predi&tion, which seem tphave been
adapted to the inclinations of Appius, which dQubt-
es the Pythia was not unacquainted with, had a dif-
ferent event, than what he, to whom it was atddreqffj
txpeted. He was in hopes, that undit Fbed i fQ c
corner of Eubcsa, he might fee the whole tnivrfe h
a ferment, without being asseted by itsemtipgn6,
In effe he avoided the disasters of the war, but
was by adifeafe, which brought him to his grave,
ompey appointed Rutilius Lupus his successor, wh9
uilt the wall cross the Isthmus, as has been relged,
After the battle of Pharfalia, two iluftriqus fgi-
dives, Serv. Sulpicius and M. Marcellus, agreed in
the fame measures with regard to their condu&4, tho'
otherwise of very different chara&ters. We have fees
them joint Consuls, and found that at the time Mar-
cellus treated Cfiar with great haughtiness, Sulpicius
was always inclined to be mope moderate. As t. the
latter he was of a very mild disposition, and was one
of the last who determined to go into Greeqe, in
order to join Pompey; and what induced him at
length to take this hazardous resolution, was proba-
bly the ill success which seemed at first to threaten
Cefar, in the Spanish war against Afranius and Pe-
treius. For Pompey was no sooner defeated than
Sulpicius gave over all thoughts of war. He seems
even to have done more, and to have at the fame
time taken the t resolution of giving up the fatisfac-
tion of living in his native country. He therefore
retired to some city of Greece or Asia, in order to pass
the remainder of his days in the study of philosophy
and polite learning, to which he had always greatly
' Nihil ad te hoc, Romane, bellum pertinet. Eubceea Ccela obti-
ebis. VAL. MAX. I. 8. OROS. VI. 15.
t What I here mention of Sulpicius, is not actually related of him
byany author, but I infer it from some paiages in Cicero, particu-
lary in the seventh letter of XI. book to Atticus, and of the third of
be IV. book, ad Famil.

applied

A. R. 705. applied himself. But Cafar, who paid great regar
An. c. to mildness and moderation, drew him sometime afte

from this inaction, and appointed him Proconfulo
Achaia, as I hall hereafter have occasion to men.
tion.

As for M. Marcellus, Sulpicius's Collegue, iis
known fact he retired to Mitylene, and there applied
himself more than ever to the study of eloquence and
philosophy, having for his inftruaor Cratippus i
philosopher, who is well known by the commendation
Cicero bestows on him in several passages. As Mr.
cellus was of a great foul, philosophy to him was not
a barren speculation: by its assistance he fuftainedthe
traverses of fortune with constancy, and found in the
uprightness and purity of his intentions, a confolatio
for the chance of events. Brutus, speaking as i.
terlocutor in one of Cicero's dialogues, expreflesgret
admiration of his constancy. But he has expressed
himself more fully, and with more energy, in a work
of his own, of which Seneca has preserved some very
memorable passages. " I t have seen, said he, Mar.
cellus in his exile at Mitylene, enjoying all the feli-
city that human nature is capable of, and more de-
firous than ever of useful knowledge. And when I
left him, I could not think I was taking leave ofa
banihed man, but rather that I myself was going
into banilhment." He added, that Cafar had palsed
by Mitylene, without making any lay there, becauk
he could not support the fight of a man of so much
merit, reduced to a situation so unworthy of him.
' How glorious was it for Marcellus, fays Seneca,

Maxirrm laudandus eft, qui hoc tempore ipso- confolturfe
q'au conflientii optima mentis, turn etiam ufirpatione & renon-
tone do&rinE. Vidi enim Mitylenis nuper virum, atque, utdixi.
vidi plane virum. Cc. Bruto, n. 25o.
t Brutus ait fe vidilTe Marcellum Mitylenis exfulantem, &, qua-
tnm moda natura hominis pateretur, beatiffime viventem neque U-
quam bonarum Artium cupidiorem, quim illo tempore. Itaque adjicit,
vifum fibi fe magis in exfilium ire, qui fine illo rediturus effet, qui
illum in exfilio relinqui- Illum exlulem Brutus relinquere non po,
tuit, Czfar videre. Contigit enim illi teftimonium utnufquc. Br"-
tus fin.e larcello reverti fe doluit, Ciefa erubuit, SEN. de Conseo
ad Helv. n. 9.

ta;

that in his exile he should create envy in Brutus, and A.k 70s-
tonfufion in Cefar. Each of them has bestowed a 4 .
very honourable commendation on him; Brutus was
concerned to return to Rome without him, and Cafar
was alhamed." It was on Cfaar's return from Alia,
after defeating Pharnaces, that Brutus, who accom-
panied him, visited Marcellus at Mitylene.
I scarce know of any but Sulpicius and M. Mar-
cellus, who thus made choice of a voluntary exile,
after the battle of Pharfalia. As for the reft, those
who did not join Cato, in order to renew the war in
Africa, had recourse to the conqueror's clemency, and
applied for leave to return into Italy, and to Rome.
Many of these latter remained in Achaia under Cale-
nus, waiting for a decision of their fate from Czfar's
hands, whom other business employed for a long time
in Alexandria. They all of them sooner or later ob-
tained what they desired: but we are nor able to be
particular on this head, unless as to what regards the
two Q Cicero's, father and son, who on this occa-
ilon afted an unbecoming part.
It must be remembered, that Q. Cicero, brother to Cic. ad
the Orator, had served as Csfar's Lieutenant in Gaul. At.. .
This however did not prevent his tiding with Pompey
in the civil war, which could not but be highly dil-
pleasing to his former General. Besides, Cxfar thought
that he was the occasion of his brother's leaving Italy,
and * had beat up for him. This is the expreflion
he made use of, to imply the signal of his departure.
Cicero wasat Brondufium, in great anxiety as to what
r:ea:ment he was to exped, when he was informed of
this expression of C-far: and though he had already
cause to complain of his brother; yet as he had even
had a great affetion and regard for him, he imme-
ciztely wrote to Cfar, in the following terms. " I
am t nor less sensibly concerned for my brother, than

for
Qi*ntum. fatrum lituum mee profe&ionis fuife. Cc. ad Att.
XI. 1.

D' D. C;lto fratre meo non minus laboro, oquii3 de m- ipso: ed
e'm.ii C.n!nmcdar hoc oluo tempore non audo. Illud dultaxat

laucii

A. Ro. formyflf: and though in my prese?; Rtvion, i

' would be presumption in me to speak in his btf

yet thus far I dare venture to intrea you nqtt
think, that it was through his fault thaF Ifailp
duty, or affetini to you. He always oexhoriedt
to remain in your interest: and when we fit p t t.
gether from Italy, he only accompanied me, not led
me, in that journey. In all other refpets, it would
be improper for me to intercede for him; and your
natural mildness, and the friendlbip fiubtUin bctwi
you and him, muRl determine you. But if the coi.
fideration of my name can be of no service to hir,
at least I beg, and repeat my instances, that it aly d
him no detriment."

This letter, which is full of brotherly affecion, i
at the fame time wrote with great prudence and cir.
cumfpeaion, and does honour to Cicero. His bro
ther did not observe the like condut in regard q
him: for when he retired to Patra, after Pompy's
defeat, he was not satisfied with declaiming againt
Cicero, to any one that would give him the heaing,
he even contrived to make Cafar acquainted wit
his unbecoming invecives. And his son, a youth of
a violent, impetuous temper, went into Asia, not so
much with intention to obtain his father's pardon, -a
to impeach his uncle. All Caear's friends, who wer
for the most part all Cicero's, resented the ingratitude
of his brother. They nevertheless were favourable to
him, knowing, that though Cicero was, without doubt
concerned at the ill return made him by his relations
yet he was far from desiring to be revenged on them.
Quintus the son, who met with Cafar at Antioch,
obtained the pardon he came to apply for, through
the recommendation of Hirtius.
tsmen adebo petere abs te, quod te oro, ne quid exitimc ab ill
fatum eff, quo minus mea in te offia confarent, minnufve te d
gerem: poti~qe semper ilium autorem noftrs conjunEtioni f,
meique itineris comitem, non ducem. are cetens in rebus ta
turn ei tribues, quantum humanitas tua veftraque amicitia pofRut
Ego i ne.quid apd te obfin, id te vehemntr etiamatque eti
rogo, Id. ibid.

This was not the only vexation Cicero met with, A. R 7s.
uring his flay at Brundufium; not to mention his A47.
Ieltic affairs, his estate running to ruin, the bad Cic. ad
conomy o his wife, the unhappy ituation of his Att.l. XT.
vourite daughter Tullia, who was obliged to be di-
ored from Dolabella, and had not wherewith to sup-
rther rank. All these fads concern Cicero's pri-
re life, and are no part of a general history. But
fides so many subje&s of grief, the cruel uncertainty
remained in for near a year, was to him so torment-
g, that he was absolutely dispirited.
Immediately on his arrival at Brundufium, he ran a Cic. Phill
ry geat risk. For presently after Anthony also '59
me there, with the victorious legions of Pharfalia.
might, had he been so disposed, put Cicero to
ath, who had returned into Italy of his own accord,
at least without any sign manual of Caesar. An-
ony forebore making use of his power, and in the
d made great merit of this pretended piece of
,ice, which Cicero very rightly tiles a highway-
n's courtesy, who boasts to have given a person his
, because he did not deprive him'of it. But at last
acknowledges, that Anthony, at that junEture,
the power of disposing of him as he thought pro.
r Though he was freed from this danger, yet he
not free from inquietude. For having conceived
es, that Ceifar would not be long before he came
o Italy, or at least, that wherever he might happen
be, he would not fail fending him some assurances
his friendship; the Alexandrian war entirely difcon-
edhim. Cfar was then too busy to think of
its more remote, and was a long time without
ding any advices into Italy. During this interval
was nominated Dicator; and Mark Anthony hav-
untier him the title and authority of General of
horse, Cicero's fate still depended on him.
This General of the horse was far from observing
lame moderation, or confining himself within the
ne bounds as his Dicator. He had like to have
ar affronted Cicero, as to force him to leave Italy, on
'oL. IX. P the

A.R. 7°s- the following pretence. Cafar, on a salic reportwhi
Ant. C. had been spread, that Cato was returned into Iti
ic.ad and intended to appear publickly at Rome, wrot
Att.XI.7. Anthony, by no means to susser it: adling, thtl

intention was, that no one of thole, who had tak
up arms against him, fliould be permitted to ay
Italy, without his express leave. Anthony acquaint
Cicero with this letter, at the fame time makingi
different apologies for his being obliged to carry iti
to execution. Cicero dispatched a friend to him,
represent, that it was by virtue of a letter from D
labella, wrote by Czefar's order, that he had come
Brundufium. By this means he was permitted toIt
there; but he had the mortification to find thee
ception, made in his favour, particularised in t
manifesto publiihed by Anthony, conformable
Cafar's letter. So that he saw himself public
posted up, as under fubjetion to the conqueror,
the fame time, so many others either still mainta
the cause of liberty, or at least made their peace
vately, and without making the world acqua
with it.

Such treatment could not but make him une
and the Dictator's silence still kept him in greater
plexity. At length, about the beginning of June,
received a letter, which, he was told, came
1'" I7' Cfar. But as it was couched in indefinite terms,

wrote with great coolness, he fufpe&ed its being
pofititious. 'Tis probable he was not out in his
jecttre, and that Balbus and Oppius, friends toC
and Cicero, had, in conjunction with Atticus, f
this letter to comfort and give ease to a man,
funk under the weight of his affitions. Cicero
Cic. ;d mained two months longer in this uncertainty.
:,. the beginning of August he received a letter f

Cifar, with which, he owns to his wife, he was
lerably satisfied. This is doubtless the fame letter
speaks of, in his oration for Ligarius, and whe
r.rLg. u.i Cafar wifies him to continue to enjoy all the pr

gatives, and all the honours he had been possessed

7

at the fame time permitting him to retain the title of A.. 7oS.
Imperator, with the Litors and Fasces, which had Ant..
constantly remained with him, since his being Procon-
ful of Cilicia.
Cicero, to his real evils, added imaginary ones. Cic. ad
He fufpeced the facility with which Cfar forgave Att XI.
bis enemies, and conceived it might be only an arti-''
ice: and imagined that the Ditator, not having
ltally time to examine into the different circum-
nces of the persons who applied to him, reserved
imfeif for a further inquiry, when he should be more
tleifure. Cicero was not entirely free from these
pprehenfions, 'till Caesar's return into Italy. He
nt to meet him, and was received by him in so
acious and frank a manner, that at last he was
erfuaded that the palt was entirely forgotten.
Cafar, on his coming to Rome, found every thing Plut.cic.
ere in a flame. Of which I must now give the reader
me account.
We do not abound in memoirs as to what pafled
Rome, and in Italy, during Caesar's absence. He
ifelf is silent on that head in his Commentaries:
d his continuators, after his example, have con-
ed themselves to the relation of military tranfacions
nly So that for the principal fads relating to civil
airs, we have scarce any other authority than Dio,
insipid writer, with whom'tis common to abridge
alter whatever passes under his pen, and who
ould be read with diffidence and circumfpestion, if
uwould not be led into very great errors.
It was either by publick report, or private letters, X;I.
tthe account of the battle of Pharlalia came to
me. For Caxfar, through moderation and modeftv,
rbore fending any account of it to the Senate; not
ing willing to intuit Pompey's ill success, or to seem
triumph at the misfortunes of the public. The city
for a long time been subjet to Caeiar. So that
mpey's defeat and death produced no other effect
re, thn to strengthen and confirm the conqueror's

P 2 power.

A. R. 705. power. Every thing remained quiet during the ad
Ant. C. minitration of Servilius Ifauricus the Consul.

It was he doubtless who, by virtue of his poft,an,
by order of the Senate, nominated Cefar Di&atorfo
the whole ensuing year. The choice of a General
the horse properly depended on the Di&ator: bu
Cxfar was at tco great a distance to wait his orders
So that his friends procured this honourable potffQ
Anthony. The election of the other magiftrates,fuce
as Consuls, Prators, Curule AEdiles, and Questors,
became impracticable after the nomination of the
Dictator. As soon as there was a Didator appointed
his power absorbed the reft of the magistracy, who
had no longer any fundtion, but such as he please
to afign them; and he particularly presided at eec
tions. This right in equity was, in the present c
curftances, backed by force: and nobody was
hardy as even to form conjectures of Ctfar's intention
in regard to the adminiltration, as Pompey's ruin h
made his power absolute. So that on the firltofj
nuary there was no other magistrate in the whole e
pire (the Tribunes and Ediles of the people excepted
but Cefar, Dicaator, then Ihut up in Alexandria, an
Mark Anthony, General of the horse, enjoying
Rome an unlimited, undivided power.

It would have been difficult for the adminiftrati
to have fallen into worse hands: nor can any thing
imagined more vicious, or more indecent than A
Cic.Pii.. thonv's personal behaviour. Constant debaucheri
II. n. 6;. drunkennels, the low company of buffoons and
'A' ^ tresses, intemperance to that excess, as even tovom
tor. in the Forum, and in the execution of his office

these were the scenes wherewith Rome was entertai
by its finr!e magistrate. And it was thought ve
extraordinary that, at the tir;e Cefar exposed hims
to the greatest fatigues, and confronted the great
dangers, in order to put an end to a war of such i
portrnce, and of so great dificulty ; he, who appea
the chier of his party, should have no other cone
than v hat to eat, and wherewiLh to get drunk.

Yet this shameless manner of living in Anthony, A.R. 70s.
hurt none but himself; but his rapine and exactions Ant. C.
were the ruin of many citizens. Descended from a 4;'
prodigal, extravagant father, and he himself still more
prodigal and extravagant, one may guess at the ill
ituation of his affairs. Seeing therefore the power in
his hands, he made use of that opportunity to retrieve
his fortune, or rather, to indulge his rage of expence.
Hepillaged on all fides, fold publickly the laws of
property, bellowing on ome, estates, which they had
wright to, and taking from others, their lawful inhe-
tance. It may be imagined he did not want for pre-
tences, in a city abounding with malecontents, and
whose citizens, for the most part, regretted the loss of
the ancient manner of government, and only submitted
to the reigning tyranny, through necefity.
He also endeavoured to terrify people into obedience. Dio.
For which purpose, when he presided at the public as-
lkmblies and games, he kept his sword by his fide,
which had never been done before in Rome ; and was
always accompanied by a number of soldiers ready to
put his orders in execution.
The city, by resigning its liberty, might have
hoped to hve been no longer embroiled: but Dola-
ella would not permit the Romans to enjoy that flen-
der consolation. He was a young man of great parts
and courage, bold and ambitious, and further, in-
olved in debt, as were the majority of those who had
fided with Cefar. In order to get rid of all his cre-
ditors, and at the fame time make a number of
friends, by a project which could not fail pleasing the
ajority of the victorious party, he revived the
scheme attempted the preceding year by Ccelius, and
rfolved to procure an at of insolvency. The office
fTribune of the people, which subsisted, even when
ll other offices were vacant, was the only method for
olabella to put his design in execution. Although
atrician born, he got over that obstacle, by enrolling
himsef, after the example of Clodius, in the Plebeian
rdcr and was appointed Tribune. He was no

P sooner

A. R. 7s-fooner inveffed with the office, than he propoed his
Ant. C. law for abclifhing all debts; and, in order to ingrn.

tiate himself with the populace, he propoisd a second,
as Ccelius had done, which exempted tenants froQ
paying any rent to their lar-lords. These laws highl
incensed all the men of prooity yet remaining in Rome,
and two of Dolabella's collegues, * Afinius and Tre.
bellius, formally opposed them. This gave rife to
cuarrels, animofities and skirmishes, which put t
whole city in a ferment.

It suited Anthony's circumitances extremely we
to take the advantage of a law, which cancelled
debts: so that at first he favoured Dolabella's propo
,al. But it happened, that at this very time he h
tome suspicions, well or ill founded, of a criminal in
- tritue between his wife and the Tribune. Whereul
he divorced his wife, who was likewise his cousin
german, the daughter of C. Antonius, Cicero's co
legue. And as this made a breach betwixt him an
Dolabella, he made an offer of his service to the
nate, who opposed with all its might the paing
laws, prcductive of sedition, and deftrutive of
faith in society, and credit in trade. Numbers
people, who had taken up arms on this occafioa, fid
with the Tribune. Anthony, by virtue of a e
of the Senate, which enjoined him, in conjuni
with the other Tribunes, to be careful of the safe
of the city, forbid any one to carry arms, who
not-in the service of the republic, and introduced fre
troops into Rome, betides what he had for his pro
guard. Dolabella, who perceived himself favou
by the multitude, maintained his ground obftioate
both against the Senate and againt the General's f
diers. And what made him the rather persist in
obstinacy, were the accounts received of Caesar's si
ation in Alexandria, which was said to be very haza
dous, ibmuch that it was the opinion of manyth
he must there perifn. When Crefar had surmount
* This Ainius is perhaps the famous Pollio.

the difficulties in Egypt, Dolabella, apprehending AR- 7os.
sju displeasure, seemed robe willing to be more 47.
erate. But the commotions in Asia, and the war
P harnaces, being still so many impediments to
Di&ator's return, the Tribune resumed his auda-
and once more laid aside that circumfpetion he
assumed through policy, and a dread of the Dic-
tr's resentment.
During these tranfaaions, Anthony was obliged to
ve Rome, to reduce to obedience Crefar's veteran
ions, who threatened to mutiny. The victorious
ons had not received the rewards which had been
rnifed them, and nevertheless they perceived that
h service was expeced from them. For the twelfth
ion was under orders to go into Sicily, doubtless
be transported from thence into Africa against
:0, Scipio and Juba. This legion refused to tir, cic. ad
less they first were paid what had been promised ^tt. x
em: and when their officers endeavoured to bring
m back to their duty, by reminding them of their
ing liable to be punished as mutineers, they were
Ied with stones, and obliged to retire. The other
ons followed their example, and declared they
uld not march, unless they were first paid their ar-
rs. To put a flop to this disorder was the business
Anthony's journey; but Dio, who is the only au-
r who takes notice of it, leaves us in the dark as
its iccefs. He only fays, that Anthony, by an
ahard of and unprecedented ftep, created to him-
a Vicegerent, and appointed L. Cafar, his uncle
the mother's fide, Governor of Rome in his ab-
tce.
L. Cafar was a man of high birth, great dignity,
d confiummate virtue: very capable of command-
g people sensible of shame, or refpet ; but very
ai to cope with a person of Dolabella's resolution
d audacity. So that during his adminiisration, the
dition was carried to the highest excess. The cre-
!ors on one fide, and the debtors on the other,
rmed two camps in the city, between whom were

P 4 daily

A.R. rs. daily fkirmilhes. They alternately seized advanta.
Ant C. geous posts, and attacked each other with fire and

sword. Nay the disorder was so great, that the Vef.
tals thought themselves not safe in their temple, and
removed from thence the sacred relicks, with which
they were intrusted.

Anthony on his return to Rome, received a frei
order from the Senate, to be careful of the fafetyan
tranquillity of the public. The danger increased
Dolabella grew desperate, and having fixed a dayfo
the palling of his laws, he barricaded the avenuest
the Forum, erected wooden turrets to preventa
approach, and made such dispositions as are ufualin
regular war, or where a siege is to be maintained. An
thonv on his part aisembled his troops in the Cap
to', with hich he forced the barriers, seized
broke to pieces the tables on which the laws werein
'cribed, and having taken bome of the ringleade
priboncrs, he imnediaty!) executed them, by flingi
them down the Tarpcian rock. This severity, ho
ever, did not put an end to the troubles, and the
cirion was not appeased until the news of the sudd
tefcat of Pharn:.ccs, and of Cafar's being on
march home. Ncr were the divilions and animofiti
stoally fuptrefihd till the arrival of the Dichto
.w.cfe presence inforced an awe and refpeft, whic
qui:e d every body.

The lealk Dclabella could have expeted, was
iots of Cefar's favour. But this subtle politicianw
never severe to such, as had been or might be ue
to him. Besides, the general complaint against A
tronv rendered his adverlary's cause more favourabl
Ca!ar put them both on a level, by pardoning th
both.

Nor did he call any one to account, either of
own, or Pompey's party, for what was past. But
he had been at a very great expence, and as theA
can vvar had need of immediate supplies, he end
voured to raise money by all forts of methods.
ha, been cuRomary to present crowns of gold,

to erec itatues to victorious Generals. On this pre- A.R. 7'
tence Cafar received great fums, under the title of At
gratuities, and voluntary contributions. He also bor-
rowed considerably of private persons and from cities:
who well knew, according to Dio, that they ihould
never be repaid the fums they lent. But this is that
Hitorian's own conftrudion; for it is more probable,
that Cefar, who made a point of being popular, had
no thoughts of defrauding his creditors, whom he had
made such, through compulsion. Whatever might
be his intentions, his death put it out of his power to
reimburse them.
Another resource, in itself detestable, but which
e thought expedient to raise money, was to confif-
cate the goods and effects of such as had been killed
in the civil war: Pompey himself was not exempt
from this forfeiture. His estate, his house, his gar-
dens, and his goods were fold like those of a public
enemy, and bought by Anthony. Cicero has treated
this tranfacion with a force of sentiment which excites
the grief and indignation of his readers, even at this
distance of time. 'Tis one of the finest passages of the
second Philippic. " * Cefar, fays he, returned from
Alexandria to Rome, happy in his own opinion, but
in mine no one can be so, who has made his country
unhappy. He gave orders for an auction before the
temple of Jupiter Stator; and there the effets of
Pompey (alas ! though my tears cease to flow, yet my
grief is still rivetted in my heart) the effets, I fay,
of Pompey were shamefully proclaimed by a bawling
* Cefar Alexandria fe recepit: feiix, ut fibi quidem videbatur;
rei atem sententia si quis Reipu'lice fit infelix, felix effe non poteft.
Hlafi pofita pro ede Jovis Statoris, bona (miferum me! cenfumptis
tnim lacrymis, tamen infixus animo heret dolor) bona, inquam, Cn.
Pompeii Magni voci acerbillima: subje&a preconis. Una illa in re
ftrvitutis oblita civitatis ingemuit; fervientibufque animis, quum
omnia metu tenerentur, gemltus tamen populi Romani liber suit. Ex-
pefantibus omnibus, quihiun effet tam impius, tam demens, tam
diis hominibufque boftis, qui ad illud fcelus fetionis auderet accedere,
inventus eft nemo prator Antonium, prarfertim quum tot effent cir-
umn haltam illam qui oinnia auderent. Unus inventus eft, qui id au-
dert, quod omnium fugiffet & reformidafet audacia, Cc. Phil. II.
n, ,.r,

crycr

A.;R. 7T5.cryer. In this single circumstance Rome forgot its

An. slavery, to give a free course to its sighs: and fpiteof

the terror which had enslaved their spirits, the Roman
people had yet the liberty of venting their groans.
Every body was in expectation, nor could they guess,
who could be so impious, so mad, foch an enemy to
Gods and men, as by bidding for the effe&s of Pom-
pey to acknowledge them a legal forfeiture. Anthony
was the only person who offered. Among so many
villains, capable of attempting any thing, who at.
tended that auction, Anthony alone dared commit a
crime, which ihocked the most daring audacity."

One may judge by these violent inve&ives how
much the old partilans of Pompey, who had till a
majority in Rome, were affeced at feeing the effes
of this great man fold at a public sale. The want of
money was Ca:far's motive: but ought this motive to
have been more prevalent with him than the impolicy
of exasperating the people, or than the several infances
of mildness and generosity, which he had fhewnon
every other cccafion, wherein the memory of his un-
happy rval was concerned ?

This ill got booty did not long prosper with its
purc!haser: all the moveables being prefentlydiffipated,

l.oil or lift. Anthony in that not only followed the
bent of his foolish extravagant temper; but as he
confidered this, rather as an acquisition, than as a
purchase, he persuaded himself he should never be
called upon for payment of the purchafe-money. This
was by no means Cafar's intention; who was very
willing to give him time, but who nevertheless at his
return from Africa, whither Anthony had not fol-
loweJ him, demanded, for the public use, the money,
that Pompey's effects had been appraised at and fold
for. Anthony was not at all pleased with this pro-
ceeding: and in my opinion there is something charm-
ing in the manner Cicero makes him express himself
on this occasion. He introduces him expotulating
in the following manner, which at once denotes l'is

fur-

prise and indignation. " Does Caesar demand A>R. 7os.
money of me? have not I the fame pretensions to de- Ant" C
nand it of him ? Has he conquered without me? he
uld not. It was I, who furni/hed him with a pre-
tnce for the civil war. It was I, who propofedlaws
pernicious to the public. It was I, who took up
ams against the Consuls and Generals of the Repub-
lic, against the Senate and the Roman People, against
the Gods of my country, against the altars and fa-
rd hearths, against my very country. Has he only
conquered for himself? Since we are equally engaged
in the crime, why should we not equally share the
booty ?" Cicero thinks this discourse very reasonable.
" Your demands were just, fays he to Anthony, but
what is that to the purpose, the power was in Cefar's
hands." This appeared, by Cfar's making a dif-
trefs on the buyer and on his sureties: which put An-
rhony under the necessity of expoling to sale the sorry
imains of Pompey's goods and effects, in order to
raise money to satisfy his present demand. Some prior
creditors opposed this sale: and in the interim, Cfar
let out for Spain, to make war against Pompey's chil-
dren. Cicero does not inform us, whether Anthony
was at last obliged to pay. It is certain that Cfar
was afterwards reconciled to him, and that he kept
poflellion of Pompey's house.
No doubt but the reft of Cefar's friends, as well as
Anthony, took care to enrich themselves at the ex-
pnce of the vanquished party. Cicero makes parti- c. d,
cular mention of P. Sylla, who was pretty deep in these Of".- 9-
nolefs base, than cruel acquisitions. He had madefo
good ue of his kinsman's Dictatorship, that under that
'A me C. C.efar pecuniam Cur potils, quam ego ab illo ? An
ile fcne me vicit? At ne poruit quidem. Ego ad ilium belli civilis
clfa ttuii: ego leges perniciofs rogavi: ego anna contra Consules
:eratorefq.l popli Romani, contra Senatum populumque Roma-
Pnum, crntra deos patrics, araque & focos, contra patriam tuli Num
si o i
vicit ? Quorum facinus eft commune, cur non fit eorum prda
r.mmunis ?
J'l protllabs. Sed quid ad rem ? plus ille poterat. Id. ibid. n. 72.

of

A.R. 75. of Cafar, he returned to the carnage, and was onto
Ait; C. the most forward and eager purchasers.
Dio. At the fame time that Cefar endeavoured to rii

money by various methods, he was no less ftudioust
gain the good will of the people: which is certainly
point of great importance to a new government. Tc
that end, he pursued, at least in part, the plan laid
down by Dolabella; and made no scruple of being
s-ot. caf.liberal of other people's effets. It is true he went
·- iZ2 not so far as a general abolition of debts: he positively

refused it, though follicited to it by the people; fay.
ing, that he himself was incumbered with debts, but
that he had no design to defraud his creditors. How.
ever, besides the mitigation already granted by him,
to the debtors, in his first Dictatorlhip, he furtherin.
dulged them, by a discharge of all arrears accruin
since the commencement of the civil war. And wit
respect to the tenants, he eased the poor citizens by
an order, importing, that all, not renting above two
thousand sesterces annually in Rome (fifteen pounds,
twelve hillings and sixpence) should be * exempt from
payment of a year's rent, and of a quarter's only, in
the other parts of Italy.

Caesar's next care, which was not less essential, was
to reward the leaders of his party, and the compa-
nions of his victory; by giving them promotions bol
in church and tfate. Notwithstanding the current
year was near elapsed, he created, as I have alreadl
cbferved, Calenus and Vatinius Consuls. He all
appointed the Prators, anongft whom was Sallu
the Historian, who by this means took his feat again
in the Senate, from whence he had been excluded by
the last Centors. And that he might have mor
places to bestow, he increased the number of Prtor,
for the ensuing year, to ten.

Vatinius's Consulship, which continued but a few
days, was matter of mirth to Cicero. He aid, tha

T';.i is Gronovils's t explanation of Suetonius, who in this PI'
r
- . :- l ss '. - cObfcu-e.

2 tltert

there had happened, inVatinius's Consulship, a very ex- A. R. 705.
traordinary prodigy, in that there had been no change At. C
of seasons during his whole magiltracy. And on Vati- Macrob.
nius's reproaching him, that he had not been to feeSat II. 3
him, during a fit of sickness, which he had at that
time; " I did intend, replied Cicero, to have visited
" you, during your Consulship, but I was * benighted."
Cicero was always affected by whatever appeared ridi-
culous or indecent, and on thee occasions he could
not be silent.
Catullus confidered the affair more seriously; and
twas so disgusted at the personal indignity of Vati-
nius, as in his poetical hyperbole to wish for death,
rather than live to fee the Confulihip degraded by so
contemptible a magistrate. Cfar, however, beflowed
some places on persons of merit, but he was obliged
to seek them in the adverse party. He gave the go-
vernment of AchaYa to Serv. Sulpicius, and of Cifal-
pine Gaul to Brutus. Doubtless the Greeks had rea-
lbn to applaud the administration of so accomplilhed
aMagiftrate as Sulpicius. With refpe&t to Brutus, Plut.Brut
Plutarch is an evidence that he treated his province
with all imaginable humanity and mildness; and what
is more remarkable, he ascribed all the merit to Ce-
Iar, and endeavoured to procure, for him, the love
and esteem of the people. Brutus was a peribn of that
probity and veracity, that when he fought Caesar's
proteEion after the battle of Pharfalia, he immedi-
ately laid aside all animofities, and from that time
served him as a faithful friend. Though the glory
of avenging opprefled liberty made him afterwards
ifrangely change his opinion in that refpe ; yet this
opinion, as it will appear, was not absolutely conform-
able to his own private sentiments, but proceeded
trom a foreign impulse. The inhabitants of Cifal-
' Herein I follow Macrobius. But this witticism of Cicero seems
ore applicabie to the Confulflip of Caninius Rebilus, which lasted but
uon di!a, and which we shall have occasion to take notice of hereafter.

t Per Confulatum pejerat Vatinias.
Quid eat Catulle? quid moraris cnori ? Epig. 50.

pine

A R 7s5. pine Gaul expressed their gratitude to their vituol

t. c Governor, by erecting him a fatue in the market

place of Milan, which was yet to be seen in the dl!
of Plutarch.

Caesar made all necessary preparations for his fpedy
passage into Africa, where the remains of Pompen'
party were principally assembled, and became ev
day more formidable. He got himself to be c
nued in the Dictatorlhip, and to be appointed Con.
ful for the subsequent year, and he took, for his r.
legue in the Consulship, and at the fame time for hi
General of the horse, M. Lepidus, who, as I ha
already related, had done him the service of nomi.
nating him Dictator for the first time, contrary to
rules, he being himself no more than Praetor. Lepi.
dus being invetled with there two dignities, becae
the principal person in the state, in the absence
the Dictator, whom he represented as well in all Ily,
as in Rome.

Every thing now seemed ready for Cefar's depar-
ture. A furious sedition, which broke out among
the old legions, might possibly have retarded him, i
the vigour and intrepidity of the most undaunted fol
that ever existed, had not crufled in its infancy, an
evil, which apped the very foundation of his -
tune.
suet. c;. I have already mentioned that these veteranfoi-
c. 70. diers brooked ill their not having yer received te
i,^.. ii. rewards which had been promised them: and grow
Dio, ing more bold, as they perceived themselves more ne-

ceffarv, they insolently insisted on the performance o
their General's promise, and even demanded their
discharge, as having compleated their time of fervi.
The sedition first broke out in Campania: wherethe
tenth legion signalised itself for being the most muti-
nous, till then particularly attached to Cefar, andby
him as diftinguifhedly honoured: but the remem
brance of those favours only served to increase thti
pride and audacity. Cfar had not at that time where-
with to fatisfv their demands. He could only gi'e

then

them frelh assurances; and accordingly sent Sallufl, A- .s
who had been just created Pra:epr, with inftruations 7
to acquaint them, from him, that as soon as an end
Ihould be put to the African war, besides the diftri-
butions of land and money already due to them, he
would add a further gratuity of a thousand denarii
(about thirty guineas) to each man.
These offers, so wide of the soldiers expeEtations,
ierved only to exasperate them the more. Sallust was
obliged to his flight for the safety of his person: and
the editious, in the extremity of their resentment,
immediately set out for Rome, pillaging and plun-
dering all the way of their march. They even killed
several persons; among others, two old Praetors, Co:-
conius and Galba.
Cafar was under apprehensions for the city. He
caused the gates to be shut, and garrisoned the city
with what troops he had. But he took these measures
for the security of Rome, and not of his own person:
for as soon as he was informed of .the arrival of the
mutineers in the field of Mars, he went to them;
n.lugre the representations of his friends, who were
concerned for his Iafety. He boldly mounted his
Tribunal, and with a menacing tone of voice, asked
the soldiers what had brought them thither, and what
they wanted. This first ftep so bold and imperious,
began to disconcert the mutineers. They durst not
mention the rewards, the delay in the distribution
of which, had occasioned the mutiny. They con-
tented themlelves with representing, that being worn
Out by fatigue, and impoverished by the blood they
had loft in so many engagements, they were in hopes
they migiht obtain their discharge. " I give it you,"
replied Cfar, without any hesitation: and after a
ftrt silence, to mix something more mild, without
erogating from the dignity and authority of his com-

iman, le added, " and when I hall have triumphed
" with other troops, I nevertheless liall fulfil my en-

agae.ments with you."

'2ke

A R. 70. The seditious were thunderfiruck by there word

nt. c. They had no notion that Cefar would have given

them their discharge, at a time he stood in so much
need of their service. The promise of their being re.
warded confounded them; and they were piqued with
jealousy to think, that after having supported the fa.
tigue, and undergone the dangers of so many impor.
tant wars, the honour of triumphing on that account
hfould be reserved for other troops. These several
reflections still increased their confusion but there
yet appeared a spirit of mutiny among them, because
probably they could not be persuaded that Cefar
would put his threats in execution, and dispense with
their service. The Dicator on his part was for re.
tiring, as having no more to fay to them: but his
friends conjured him not to treat the companions and
assistants in his vi&ories, with so much coldness andfe.
verity. Whereupon he conrented to speak to them
once more, and to begin his speech he made use of
the word Quriits, as if he should fay citizens, because
he no longer confidered them upon the footing of
soldiers.

This expreflion compleated their confusion. They
insisted, that they were boldiers, and had recourse to
the most fubmiflive entreaties, protesting the fincerin
of their repentance. They asked it as the greateti
favour, that he would take them with him into Africa,
promising that they alone would defeat the enemy
how numerous soever, and even offered to submit to
a decimation if he thought proper. Caesar having
brought them to the point he wilhed for, neverthe-
less, for some time, supported his resolution. He
declared he had no intention to spill their blood; but
said that soldiers, who were yet capable of service,
and had retlfied to obey orders, deserved no better
treatment than to be broke. However, their follici-
tations and entreaties in the end got the better of his
conitancy, and he Icemed to grant them as a favour,
what it was his intereit earndtly to desire. He con.
tinued only inflexible with relpetc to the tenth legion,

I

o whorn le reproached their ingratitude, after soAR. .7
many marks of favour hown them. The soldiers of .. C.
that legion were in the utmost despair, and not being
able to obtain their pardon, voluntarily followed him
into Africa. Though they came thither without be-
ing ordered, Cfar, however, made use of them:
but as they lay under the ignominy of being the most
seditious and most obstinate,. he exposed them on all
hazardous occasions, in order to get rid of .them.
And such as escaped, and survived the war did nor,
however, escape further punishment. They were re-
trenched a third of their share in the booty, and in the
dilribution which he made of the lands, on his return
to Italy.
It was ever his maxim to treat deserters and muti- suet. cr.
neers with rigour: but for other faults, he was more C. 67.
mild and traatable. He often, after one considerable
viftry, difpenied with their ordinary duties, and per-
mitted them to indulge themselves in all reasonable li-
berties, faying with great good humour, * that his
fibl.iers, in the midst of pleasure and good cheer,
could nevertheless fight stoutly, when there was an
occasion. In his harangues, he did not address them,
after the manner of the ancient Roman Generals, by
the appellation of Soldiers, but he made use of a
more endearing exprefflon, calling them Comrades.
He was also very careful about their cloathing, and
cnanented their arms with gold and silver, as well
bhcauie they naturally loved magnificence, as that the
value of their armour might make them more careful
nct to lore it. But in all affairs of mutiny, he made
ie of an inflexible severity, knowing that he subdued
is enemies to no purpose, if the troops, by whose as-
filiance he conquered them, and kept them in sub-
milion, rfutfed to obey him,
f Jactare f)litus, mitites suos etiam ungnentatos bene pugnare
', :c Milite eos pro concione, fed blandiori norine Commili-
;Ci appeal.abat. . SUET. c. 67.
VOL. IX. All

A. R. 70. All this is good policy, and might be of fernee tt
At. C. the leader of a fation. But to indulge soldies in luX

ury, is contrary to all good rules, andunbeoming
commander invested with a lawful authority.

As oon as Czfar had quelled the above-mentiod
mutiny, he prepared to set out for Africa Before I
follow him thither, I hall give some account of thb
strength of the forces of Pompey's party in that pr
vince.

TH£

t H7 3
THE
ROMAN HISTORY.

BOOK Tza FORTYLSIXTIL
C Ontaining Cafar's war in Africa. Cato's

death. Cefar's triumphs. His plan of,
Government, and his application to.
wards reforming divers abuses. Anno Roma
706.

SEC T. I.
,Itells Scipip comes into Africa, to meet yoVrrs a nd
Juba. His charafler. They are joined by Cato. Cato's
march through the deserts of Libya. He makes tba
fnfible of Scipio's authority, by himself fubitting to
fr-ve under him. He saves Utica, which Juba wv/ul3
have demlifhied, and Jhuts bimelf up there. Strength
of the vanquibed party in Africa. Cafar goes into
Africa. His inconceivable dipatcb. His cutrion to
obviate the vulgar fuperfiitions. He bad at fir/i but
fe troops with him, and those very illprovided. La-
lienus attacks him. A great battle, wherein Cefar is
put to great difficulties. Magnanimity of one of La-
ienus's soldiers, who was latcly come out of slavery.
Cfar's diffculties and dangerous situation. yuba be-
tins his march to join Scipio. He is obliged to return
to the defence es his Kingdom, invaded by Sittius. C4ar

Q2 zkeeps

keeps close in his camp. He endeavours to ingratiate
hiEfelf with the people of the Province. A great num-
ber of Getulians and Numidians desert ard (ome oyer it
bim. Hle receives a reinforcement of troops and provi-
cr.s. Cata adv'fes Scipio to protraSi the war, but Jfe.
in his cc!nfcl rjesed, repents having given up tie
co.mm nd. Scisio's cruelty to a Centurion and some it.
teran Soldirs of the enemn. A terrible florm, which
greatly ii;c7mmdesafr s a r? ny. fpatic amncng Cfars
tro.ps, n the approach of Juba. Singular e.pedint
nm3sR z.5& cf 0v Cj ar to ecourage them. Juba's pride
ar d aroganrr.- rutnfion of-"rll Crfar's forces. HI
-;;f:es f.ie cffice-s. A remarkable i;nftarce bs Cefar's
a vr iy. He puts P. Ligarius to death, for bavins
cu ti:r-.C ii: carms agriif bini:, notlitlftanding the par
.on gra tca d liii in Spain. Cdfar particularly applies
kim elf to the difciilinin;g cf his troops. Battle f ba
jss. Melimcrable engagemnt of a Soldier with an el-
p-art. Cdfar prcceeds to attack Utica. Cato is ail-
itng to decd te itown, but finds nobody disposed tolft
ccnd hii;. lthreupcn having taken a resolution to di[f-
atch hi bnfel f, his whole attention is employed in rcar.
ir, te retreat cf the Senators that had accompanied
-i.:n. Catc's la supper. His death. Reflexions there
cn. Cato tr.ly: valuable for the mildness which ac
{cin:pn:cd lis resolution. He may be conjidered as e
cf te m;rft ''irtuous men Paganijm ever produced. I.
excuai betw, laviour to his wife Alarcia. His surd.
Com;,mendaticns bcwed on him by the Uticans. Ex-
prejfi cf Cfcr, on the news of his death. WIlat
,tt.y be tcught cf CC-fr's concern, in not having been
ab.e to save h:s life. Cefar enters Utica. Pardis
Ca:o's /l.', ad imposes a beavy tax on the Romps
fet.led i that c'i. Juba's flight. Zama, the Metrc-
polis cf is Ki.d:m, , sluts its gates against him. tis
dcatb. 7-e Ci':.ercr meets w:th nofurther oppfition.

ec,?i'us Sci'i: s;i's Cn his own sword. Numidiar-
c';:ced to a Rc;i;.n Prcvince. Saliift appointed Ge-r
n.-r f it, 'whi.ie c rzu's with great tyran.y. C4'ea
d.; i:-:ion cf r-ewards a.:d puiitn:en:s. e ptfts4:

'' krl

death Faustus Sylla and Afranius. His ldemency it the
reft. Hefets out for Rome, having put an end to the
Africa; war, in little more than five months.
PRELIMINARIES of the AFRICAN WAR,

F T E R the battle of Pharfalia, Metellus Scip Dio Do,.xliii
retired, as I have before took notice, into Appian.
Africa, where he might depend on the double affif- Vt.;lcl i
tance of Juba and Vanus. Juba King of Mauritania,
was the more firmly attached to Pompey's party, be-
caule he looked upon himself as its chief support;
and the success of his arms against Curio, as it had
augmcnted his couraget so it had encreafed his at-
tachment to a cause he had so gloriously defended.
Varus, whom Curio's defeat had confirmed in the
poffflion of the Province of Africa, had under his
command some Roman legions, who had given proof
of their fidelity to-Pompey. So that Metellus Scipio
found the country, where he intended to renew the
war, sufficiently furnished with forces, but he had
not a sufficient military knowledge to make the proper
uie of them; having scarce any more nierit; than what
he claimed from an high extration, an illustrious
name, a personal courage more adapted to a private
Soldier than to a Commander, and an implacable ha=
tred to Cfar. But he wanted military experience;
the whole course of his life not affording one instance
to dignify him as a warrior. And as for the qualifi-
cations of a great man, he was ill more deficient.
He was neither observable for his concern for the
public good, nor for his noble sentiments, nor for his
mildness, nor moderation. On the contrary, he was
remarkable for the vice peculiar to narrow fouls,
mean an obstinacy, which rendered hirr incapable of
receiving good advice: which he might easily have
had at least from Cato, who caime and joined him
with upwards of ten thousand men. But we hall find
1E knew not the value of such an ally.

Q sr,

We left Cato in the city of Cyrene, towards whic
he had bent his courft, as oon as he heard of Pol
pey's death. As he thought his accepting the cow
mand of the fleet, and of those on board it, indifpen
fible; he could not do better than a unsion of hi
and Scipio's forces. But as the season was too far ad
vanced, and as there would be great hazard for th
ships in paling the Syrtes, (which are some very das
gerous flats, so called) he determined to undertake th
journey by land, notwithstanding he foresaw it mud
be attended with incredible fatigue. For he hads
dry sandy country to cross, uninhabited and over-ru
with serpents of all kinds. Cato therefore made am
pie provision of water, which he loaded on a&s. He
provided himself alo with variety of carriages for
transporting the baggage, and for the convenience of
such as ihould be incapable of marching, throug
sickness or fatigue. And latly, to remedy the fl
effets from the bites of the serpents, he took wid
him some of the Pfylli, a people of Africa, to who
antiquity has attributed the extraordinary virtuel
rendering themselves invulnerable to serpents, and of
curing such as have been bit by them. This poen
teems reducible to the art of extraing poi~a by
fuclion.

These precautions were sufficient to animate, to
certain degree, those, who were to accompany Cato,
in this fatiguing march: but the courage of their
commanders was their chief support. He marched
at their head, his * pike in his hand, setting an ex.
ample to the reft chearfully to support the fatigue:
and this his deportment was infinitely more prevalent
than any exhortations, or orders. He never made

See the Dissertation of M. l'Abbe Souchai pon the Pfylli, tm
vn. of the Memoirs of the Academy of Belles Lettres.

Ipfe mnu fui pila gerens, prsecedit anheli
Mi!iris ora pedes: monftrat tolerare labores,
Non jubet, & nulli vehirur cervice fupinus,
Carpentove fedens: fomni parciffunus ipfe e,
Ultimus hautor aquea. Luc. . 7.

ure

use of any carriage, not even of a hore. He slept
the least of any in his army, and was the lat to quench
his thirit, if by accident they met with any spring on
their march. This march took him up thiry days,
t the expiration of which he came to Leptis *, where
he passed the remainder of the winter. The party as-
ifmbling in Africa, and which Caesar' long fay in
Alexandria allowed time to grow formidable, flood
iL great need of the wisdom and authority of Cato.
Scipio and Varus were not on very good terms, by
reason the latter, being fond of command, would not
give it up to the other, on a frivolous pretence that
he had been, for a considerable time, commander in
the province: and King Juba's pride and barbarian
pomp was insupportable to them both. Cato's prc-
fence, in fme measure, put a stop to these disorders.
He soon taught Juba to pay a proper deference to
the reputation and pre-eminence of the Roman name:
for when at their firit interview, the Numidian Prince
had taken the place of honour between Scipio and
Cato, this haughty Roman removed his feat, in order
to place Scipio in the middle between the King and
him. This lefton, however, was not sufficient, either
to humble Juba, or to inspire Scipio with sentiments
qual to his rank: and we hall have an opportunity
of relating some instances, in the sequel of this his-
ory, which prove that the Numidian had not forgot
s pride, nor Scipio his base obsequious flattery.
As for the dispute betwixt Scipio and Varus, Cato
ntirely put an end to it, by himself submitting to the
rders of the former. He had a tender made for him,
y the consent of Scipio and Varus, of the chief
command, and which he had incontestably the better
ight to, from his personal qualifications. But the
w determined it against him. Scipio had been Con-
1, whereas Cato bad never been more than Prator.
There were two cities of this name, diftinguilhed by the epithets
Oreater and Lesser Leptis. I imagine this to be the Lesser Leptis,
'ich lies more weltery, and is ituated towards the north of the
tet Syrtes,

Q.4 So

So that he declined the offer; proteftirg, that' s'ht
was engaged in the defence of the laws, he would not
begin, by violating them. He even refused to di
vide the authority: faying, that it was more for the
advantage of the cause to have but one Chief. Thi
great austerity is certainly very commendable: bt
Cato repented it, when he was convinced by experience
that Scipio was not equal to his post.

After this submission of Cato, it would have a-
peared very ill in any other, not to acknowledge Sci.
pio, as General. Not only Varus Submitted to it, but
Afranius, who had been Consul: and confcquentlyPe.
treVus and Labienus, who, though of long experience
in war, yet were not of sufficient rank to expet the
command.

The first ftep of the Chiefs, after this union, wa
to lecure the allegiance of the country they were the
in: and as the inhabitants of Utica were, with reafo
fufpecred to entertain a secret inclination for Cafl'
party, Juba, a Prince of a violent and cruel tempe
was for destroying the city and exterminating its in
habitants. Utica, which was considerable, even wh
Carthage subsisted, became more so by the ruin
that capital of Africa. It was the residence f th
Pro-consul, and full of Roman citizens, particular
of Knights, who had fettled there, on account of i
commerce. Cato therefore would not content to th
destruction of so important a place, or to the death
so many men, ccecially as most of them were Romans
and though Scipio was of Juba's opinion, Cato fpok
so forcibly in the council, and inveighed with so muc
vehemence and indignation against so unparalleled
piece of cruelty, that he put a flop to the executii
or this inhurman project.

-owever, it was necefary to take some precaution
to prevent Criar's being received in Utica. Att
requelt of the inhabitants themselves, and agreeab
to Scipio's desire, Cato undertook to defend the city
h.cfe extent, riccs, ar.d numerous inhabitants,
w1cil as its fortificaticns, rer.ered it very confiderabl

an

and which frill became more so, in the hands pS 1o
atlive and vigilant a Governor. He .fonrmed great
magazines of corn in the city, repaired its wall,
crelted turrets, and formed a fort of camp''withoit
the city, enclosed with a ditch and palisade, wherein,
after having taken away their arms, he lodged all the
youth of Utica. As for the reft of its inhabitants, he -
kept them within the walls, ftri&cly watching their .
motions, though, at the fame time, prote&ing them
from any insults from his soldiers. So that Cato not
only did an at of generofityand juflice,'.in rescuing
Utica: he even rendered it greatly advantageous to
the very persons, who, through a headlong fury,
would have destroyed it. From thence, he furnilhed
Scipio with arms, money and provisions, and this
place became the grand magazine for the' upplies cf
the army.
It is easy to be conceived, that Pompey's party be-
ing so well eftabliihed in Africa, that province became
the place of rendezvous for such, who, after the bat-
tleof Pharfalia, still retained any hopes, or resolution,
toretrieve their loss. The conquered oon were con-
fiderable enough, both by land and ea, to become
formidable to their conquerors. Their forces con- Hit.deB.
filled of a numerous cavalry, four legions belonging Afric. .
to King Juba, a great number of light-armed troops, &
tIn legions collected ot raised by Scipio, fix-fcore ele-
pF!;nts, and several fleets, dispersed along the coast.
Scipio, for the raising o numerous an army, had
draincd the province, and pressed the very labourers
into the service, insomuch that the summer before
*iar's arrival in Africa, there was no harvest, for
'ant of hands. Nevertheles, as the country is ex-
tremely fertile, the former harvests i;nfficed abun-
dantly to stock Scipio's magazines. Being himself
therefore in plenty, his next ftep was to dittrtfs the
tnemy on his arrival: accordingly he lail the whole
country waite; and . maing choice of a few ftroPg
places, wherc lie lodged good garrilors, he dtftroyed
l th- rit, and compelled their inhabitant, to go into

those

tbofe which he had fortified. His flet allfo w
great use to him: from whence he detached squadron
to cruise on the enemy, and to make descents in Sici
and Sardinia; seizing all the arms and all the
they could lay their hands on, and with which
African army was but ill supplied. And now
began to be apprehensive in Italy, as appears by
LX. ad veral of Cicero's letters to Atticus, let so pow

an enemy flould make a descent there, whilf C
was employed in Egypt and Aia. At the fame ti
fbme commotions happened in Spain, of which yo
Pompey, by the advice of Cato, prepared to
advantage. So that the danger still increasing, Cca
after having remedied, in Rome and Italy, what r
quired his more immediate attention, found he
not a moment to lose, to go and appease a ftonn
less violent than that which he had quelled at Pi
falia.

He went there, with an aivity not to be co
ceived and he carried it so far, that if I may be al
lowed to speak my thoughts, such dispatch out to
serve as a precedent to none but those who are equ
to him in parts, and would become ralnefs in an
one, who has not an adequate fund in himself to el
on.
Hft. de B He left Rome about the end of the year in which
Afric. . Calenus and Vatinius were Consuls. He pafled t

ftreights at Rhegium, and from Mellina, he marched
diretly to Lilybaum, where he arrived the * j7t
of December. But it must be observed, that the Ro
man Calendar was then in great confusion; so thatthe
day they reckoned the 17th of December, was in
reality the 3oth of September. He was no sooner
come to Lilybaum, than he hewed his inclinationto
embark, though he had but one legion with him, and
that new raised, and scarce fix hundred horse: and
that every body might be convinced, that he would
* I tranfate in this anner XIV. Ka. Jan. because in Nunm's C
1ldar, whkh t r o then followed, December had but sg day

8 sussea

r no delay, he pitched a tent for himself, without
city, and so near the iea, that it was alhit walgb
its waves,
ofeveral days he was prevented weighing ancher,
the badness of the weather: and by thii delay,
land forces and fomie ships of war and transports
an opportunity of joinig him; so that in a bort
he had with him fix legions, one of them of ve-
s, two thousand bhrfe, and a great number of
of both kinds. Ntwithtanding the nipofi-
yof failing, yet he embarked his soldiers and
wrs; the foot, on board the men of war, and the
alry, on board the transports: and the very intfant
bad weather ceased (on the 25th of December) he
to ea, without even appointing a place of ren-
vous; because tho enemy being in pelflelon o'
~ whole African coast, he did not know exaftly
lre he should land. His fleet happened to be fepa-
d, and every Qon steered what course he judged
/i convenient. He himxelf, with few attendants,
wind proving favourable, descryed land the fourth
a, and having coasted Clupea, Neapolis, and some
ir maritime places, he disembarkcd near Adrume-
m, with three thousand foot and one hundred and
horse. This handful of men was, at first, his
hole defence, in a country poffeifed by an innumera-
multitude of his enemies.
Itis reported that in getting out of his ship, he fell Sluet. c3.
n. As he knew how much the vulgar were dif- n' s'
fed to fperilition, and that his soldiers might not
ink this fall of his of ill omen, he had the presence
mind instantly to obviate such an effect, by extend-
ghis arms, as if he meant to embrace the earth, and
ing out with a loud voice, " Africa, I have hold
thee."
He had made use of a like precaution to prevent an
prefflon, which the name of the commander of the
trary party made on several. Every body was ac.
uainted with, and admired the glorious atchieve-
cntsof the two Scipios, in Africa. Consequently

it

it was imagined, that, by a certain fatality, vifto
must neceifarily follow their steps, in that count
and attend on their name: and that there was nolp
fibility of a Scipio's being defeated, in a country
fortunate to his family. Cfar, who knew that it
often of dangerous consequence to run counter to
pular prejudices, and that the best method of obv
ing them, is to seem to conform to them, brou
with him a man of indifferent parts, and irregular
rals, who was of the family, and bore the name
Scipio.
ia n. 3 The enemy had a garrison in Adrumetum. G

made an attempt to gain the Governor; but not be
able to succeed, he resolved to remove furtherfr
the town. The garrison made a ally to harraf
retreat; but were repulsed, notwithstanding thei
quality of his forces: and, which is almost incredi
thirty Gaulimh horsemen several times broke, and
to flight, two thousand of the Moorilh cavalry.
the first of January, he encamped near Rufpina;
there he commenced his third Diaatorfhip and
third Consulship.
A. R. 706. C. JULIUS C.ESAR III.

*6. M.. .MILIUS LEPIDUS.

The citr of Rufpina, with its adjacent villages,
submited to Csfar; as likewise did Leptis, a p
of importance on the ame coast; so that this ente
ling General had already more than one port at
dilpofal. He was particularly civil to all who joi
his party, that others might be tempted to followth
example.

The three principal points, which first empo
his attention, were, to colle& a sufficient quantity
corn and provisions for the subsistence of his troo
to re-assemble his scattered fleet; and to be suppl
from Sardinia and Sicily, with all forts of ani
tion, and with fresh re-inforcements. Whatever
was able to do himself, he trusted to the executio

one else: but headed his own foraging parties,.AR- v.
even put to sea in quest of his hips.. By de- A .'
es, all the forces he had set out with from Sicily,
ed him, and they made hist to live in his camp,
ough with some difficulty. But in the midst of all Hit.n. o.
e dificulties, he preserved a serenity of counte-
ce, and a confidence of success, which inspired his
diers with the like sentiments. The fight of their
neral, in whom they absolutely confided, dispelled
apprehensions of danger, or fatigue.
However, this army was far from being numerous,
almof entirely composed of new raised troops.
that Cfar flood in need of an augmentation of
res, as well as of a supply of ammunition. For
ich purpose he sent orders into Sardinia, and into
the adjacent provinces, to dispatch ample convoys
his army, immediately on the receipt of his let-
s. He ent Rabinius Poftumus into Sicily, for a
nforcement of troops, and dispatched Salluff into
e ifk of Cercina, to seize and bring away the maga-
es of corn, raised there by the enemy. And he ex-
red his orders to be executed without any demur;
r would he admit of any excuse. It was to no pur-
e, to represent the danger, or difficulties: he would
obeyed.
Before he could possibly receive there supplies, he
ppened to be attacked by a detachment of the
my, whose numbers were infinitely superior to his.
or on the fourth of January, being with a foraging
rty, consisting of thirty cohorts, (making about
ten thousand foot) four hundred horse, not yet re-
vered from the fatigue of the fea-paffage, and some
archers, he received intelligence by his scouts,
the enemy was coming upon him. This hap-
ed to be Labiens, at the head of a considerable
y of cavalry and infantry. His cavalry consisted
ixteen hundred Gaulilh and German horse, which
had brought with him from Thessaly, betides eight
oufand Numidian horse, which were joined, during
cnggucment, by eleven hundred chosen horsemen

more,

R 6. more, brought up by Petreius. The ifatiry
C. well heavy as light-armed, was four timn as Ra

rous, and sustained by fingers and archer, o
and on horse-back. Labienus made no doubt of t
vicory: and had declared that his intention wa
tire Cafar's soldiers, by his numbers: so that, th
at first they might have some advantage of the
he hould attack them with, yet in the end havin
longer the power of killing, through fatigu,
must necessarily be defeated.

In effec, Cfar had need of all his kill and
rage to resist so great a superiority. He himlf
haved with great gallantry: and feeing a soldier
away who carried the eagle of one of his legions
laid hold of him, and turning him round,
' You mistake: you mufl go that way to meet
' enemy." However, he could not prevent his
pie being surrounded, so that they were for fomei
obliged to fight in the hollow circle: but at if,
attacking them in a column, he found means to
his way through, and break his assailants, n
standing their numbers. The light troops, of w
Labienus's army was almost entirely composed, c
not sustain the weight of the attack of the legi
soldiers, when once they came hand to hand. And
far knew so well how to improve this advantage,
after several alternative attacks and retreats, he
pulsed the enemy beyond a hill, of which he took
session; and having there halted for some time,
marched back unmolested, to his camp.

In this ation, which lasted near fcven hours,
trcius was wounded: and Labienus was in very
danger, through an adventure, which defervesto
related. He appeared between the two armies,
horse-back, without his helmet, encouraging his
pevple, and at times reproaching and insulting C
soldiers. " It ill becomes you," said he to
" who are but new raised militia, to affect o mi
"haughtiness. Has Cfar so soon bewitched

He has betrayed you into so great danger, thn

relly pity you." Whereupon one of the soldiers AI. l
whom he addrefied himself, made him the follow- aL.
reply: " Labienus, I am no novice in the art of
ar. I am a veteran soldier of the tenth legion."
You have a mind to impose upon me," replied
ienus; I do not fee any where the colours of
the legion you speak of. " Well then," answered
soldier, " I am going to make myself known to
ouI." At the fame time lifting up his bever, that
face might be seen, he flung his javelin with all
might at Labienus. It milfed him, but wounded
horse.
In the account of this engagement, I have fol-
d the ancient author of the memoirs of the Afri-
war. The Greek historians are not so favourable
Cefar, and fay plainly, that he had the worst offut.
However, it is evident from the fa&s, that, al-Di,.'a"
ng he did sustain sone loss, he was neither beaten
broke, and that he saved the chief part of his
s: which was all he could propose under such
mtances.
This was sufficient for Labienus to boast a vicory:
a few days after, Scipio having joined him with
legions and four thousand horse, this General,
was not less vain-glorious than his Lieutenant,
ught it necessary to bestow extraordinary cormmen-
ins on his pretended vi&orious troops, and to dif-
bute military rewards among such as had signalized

bravery. Among others, Labienus prerened vd. Mm.
one of the cavalry, for whom he requested some VULa4.
en bracelets. Scipio, who knew that this soldier
lately come out of slavery, refuted to belfow them
him, thinking that the meanness of the object
Id depreciate the reward. However, that he
tnot be discouraged, Labienus gave him some
y, of which he had plenty; having raised a great
in Gaul, while he served there under Cefar. But
i, still pursuing the fame idea, said to the fol-
" You receive there the present of a rich man."
brave fellow, who had so very lately regained

hli

A.R-,6. his liberty, that he almost still retained the-marks

f46 slavery, was very sensible of the difference betwixtd

reward which had been denied -him, and that wi
he had just received. Wherefore he returned.Labi
nus his money, and remained motionless, his
fixed on the ground, expressing his sorrow and di
tisfaction. Such a noblerefs of foul 'made an amen
for the meanness of his late condition :-and such
Scipio's opinion; who thereupon aid to him, Y[
" General presents you with silver bracelets."
theie words, the soldier transported with joy ran,
triumph, to receive the General's gratuity. Had
Scipio's soldiers had the like elevated notions, C
had found more difficulty to conquer them.
--:- * His situation was certainly very disagreeable;

"_ ing pent up by an enemy much superior to him

B ut as he was in daily expectation &f a reinforcen
cf his veteran troops, till their arrival, he made
best ule he could of what troops he had on thef
and as an augmentation to his army, he draugh
out of the feet all the men, that were not abfolu
J;rcefary in worlking the Ihips, and that could be
n·ays serviceable to him on land. His next care
i..rr.ediaely to intrench himself. He also drew i
or communication from the city of Rufpina,
from his camp to the sea, in order to fecurehis
treat, if neceiTary; and for the more easy recei
the supplies he expeEted.

But the want of victuals and forage was his
eft trouble. He was master but of fix miles rou
in all Africa: and that had been purposely plunde
as I have already mentioned. So that he had
very little corn, of which he was extremely fpari
and as for the horses, they were fed with fea-w
sleeped in fefh water.

These were very advantageous circumtances
Ceifar's enemies: and Juba, who had received an
count of his situation, left his Kingdom, attended
a numerous body of horse and foot, in order
.hen on his arrival the whole force f the .

- houl

ftould be united, they might cruth so weak and dil- A.R.7o6
ntrfred an adversary. Caear's good fortune, or rather Ant. .
the effe& of hi intrigues, drew off that Prince, whea
lh was upon the point of joining Sipio.
In the account of Cariline's conspiracy I mentioned Dio.
one Sittius, who, having been obliged for fame Appian
cerain ill-behaviour to leave Italy, had retired into
Africa. This man, who wanted for neither courage
aor conduct, had formed a little army of men levied

Italy and Spain: and in the wars between the
ptty princes of Africa, he let himself out to thofs
ho would pay him the best. And it being remarked,
t the fide he took always proved vi&Etrious, every
e was desirous to have him for an ally: so that his
irs were in a very good posture, having troops
y well disciplincd at his disposal, and a confider-
ereputation in the country. Sittius's former at-
hment to Catiline, doubtless easily determined him
comply with Cfar's follicications, who-had also
n Catiline's friend. So that Juba had no sooner
uitted his Kingdom, than Sittius, in conjuntion
ih Bogud, King of part of Mauritania, entered it;
k Cirta the capital of Numidia, and two cities be-
.ging to the Getulians. And as he continued plun-
ring the country, and alarming the cities, Juba be.
n to be apprehensive that he right be stripped of
own territories, whilst he was upporting a foreigt
rrel. Whereupon he returned, leaving Scipio only
rty elephants, which were not yet manageable for
It is easy to judge, how dangerous Jub's .arrival
uld have been to Cir, since that, noctithftand-
gthat Prince's retreat, he.did not think himfe 'of
ce fufficiept to contend with Scipio. He Icept
in his camp, which -he had strongly fortied,-
d in the front .of which he had difperied caltrops
d chevaux de fife, to.prevent the approach of the
?y's horse. Jit was to no purpose for Scipio to
rhim battle; Cefar constantly declined it: and
is General, who-had appeared so ardent on all other
VOL. IX. R occa.

l R7To.occafions, and with whom it had been cuftomaryt

Ct. c. provoke, harrafs, and force his adversaries to an e.

gagement, was as remarkable at this time for his coo
temper, and for enduring quietly in his camp the in.
fults and bravados of the officers and soldiers of
contrary party.

However, this Gtuation was extremely irksome
him; and in order to extricate himself, he lent f
orders into Sicily, to bring him troops without
delay, and without any regard to the rigour of the
son, or whether the wind was favourable or not.
so great was his impatience, that the very next
after his orders were dispatched, he complained of
delay in their execution, and was constantly loo
towards the sea, in expecation of the arrival of
transports.

During this compelled leisure, Cefar was not i
Besides keeping his soldiers conftandy employed
removing earth, and in the conftrudion of works
all kinds, such as towers, forts, and moles adv
into the sea; he sent circular letters into the wh
province of Africa, to notify his arrival. For by
ion of the few troops he had brought with him,
on account of his inacion, it was not believed in
country that he was come in person, but onlytha
had sent one of his Lieutenants. This precauu
was of use to him. For as Scipio had extremely
raffed and difireffed the province, great numbers
the principal inhabitants came from all parts to
far's camp, to complain of their treatment. The
fability with which he gave the audience, made a
favourable impression on the complainants, who
convinced he was not insensible of their missort
And this mild usage induced Acilla, a city ofi
portance, to open her gates to him, and admit a
rifon.

He had also proper agents in the enemy's
who enticed away several of their legionary soldi
but particularly of the Getulians and Numidians,
deserted in crowds, and came and offered theirfe

Cafar. The name of Marius was in great reputa- A.R:7o6.
among there people; and as care had been taken Ant. C
let them know that Csefar was an ally of that cele-
ted man, these Barbarians had conceived an incli.
ion for him, and desired nothing more than to
e him. So that he dispatched into Getulia some
these runagates, who were considerable in their
nation, to persuade their countrymen to revolt
thing succeeded, and produced a diversion, which
pt some part of Juba's forces in employ.
And now at length he received, what he had t
gwilhed for, a supply of troops and provisions.
ut without any difficulty made himself master ot
isle of Circina, where he found plenty of corn,
ch he ent to camp; and from Sicily, Allienus
t two legions, nine hundred Gaulilh horse, and a
sand lingers or archers, who after a pairage of
days came safe into the port of Rufpina. This
ble reinforcement diffused a joy through the whole
y; and Cefar now thought himself in a condi
to come out of his camp, and draw nearer the
my. This motion produced an engagement be-
n the cavalry of the two parties, wherein Scipio
ined a considerable loss. The Gaulish horse, in
service of Labienus, were surrounded and en-
ly cut to pieces: by which means Caesar's adver-
s were deprived of the flower of their cavalry.
ipio might now have been convinced of the rea- Plut Cab
blenes of Cato's counsel, who, as often as he ent
supplies from Utica, as constantly advised him
to engage in a general a&ion with a warrior of Cza-
abilities, but to prorra& the war. But ignorance
refumptuous, and will not abide instruction. Sci-
reje&ed Cato's advice with disdain: and in a let-
hewrote to him, he taxed him with cowardice,
told him, that he ought to be satisfied with be-
safe in a good city and behind ffrong walls, and
it was going too far, to endeavour to dissuade
n from following the ditates of their courage.
was nettled at this reproach, and as an instance

. . .R2 that

AR. 706. that fear had no part in the advice he gave, he a

. ' fwered Scipio, that if he would return him thetro

he had brought into Africa, he was ready to go
the head of them into Italy, and make a diverfi
there, which would be very advantageous to the con
mon cause, and muff oblige Cafar to quit his prest
acquisitions and return thither. Scipio made at
this proposal; and it was then that Cato repen
having relinquished the command to a man, who
only was not of a disposition to promise any fu
in the war; but who, even supposing, contary to
probability, he should meet with a favourable
of fortune he by no means merited, would be i
pable of any moderation in viAory, and would
the vanquished with cruelty and contempt. F
that initant he determined, what he had before tho
on, never to fee Rome more; not even though
event of the war hould be conformable to his wil
but resolved to go and confine himself to forme
tant corner of the earth, where he mould not be
ness of the tyranny, with which the conquered w
be treated.

His mistrust of the use Scipio would make of
tory was not ill founded, if we may judge by f
instances in this General's conduct, at a time w
the uncertainty of success ought to have made
more moderate. I hall only mention one.
Hjt. Two vefftls belonging to the fleet, which bro
c' t' the last reinforcement to Csefar, being separated

their convoy in a torm, were taken by ScipiQ'L
tenants who guarded the coasts, and all the
on board were made prisoners. These soldiers
partly veterans, partly new raised; among the
there happened to be a Centurion. Scipio had
before him, and spoke to them in there terms:
" know that 'tis not by your own inclination, bu
( the instigation of your wicked General, tha
" impiously wage war on your fellow-citizens, ad
"the honefteft part of the Republic. If ther
" now that fortune has put you in our power,
=' : t

F will take this opportunity to unite with the good A. R. 706
citizens, in the defence of the commonweal I not An.,
only promise you your life, but you may expet to
be rewarded. Let me know what you think of
the proposal.'
The Centurion, who on this occasion was spokes.
n, made him a very different answer from what he
efted. " Scipio, fays he, (for I cannot give you
the appellation of General) I return you my hearty
thanks for the good treatment you are willing to
how to prisoners of war; and perhaps, I might
accept of your kindness, were it not to be pur-
chased at the expence of an horrible crime. What
Shall I carry arms and fight against Caesar my Ge.
neral, under whom I have served as Centurion
and againfl his vitorious army, to whole renown
I have so many years endeavoured to contribute by
my valour? 'Tis what I will never do: and even
advise you not to pulh the war any further. You
know not what troops you have to deal with, nor
the difference betwixt them and yours; of which,
if you please, 1 will give you an indilputable in-
fance. Do you pick out the best cohort you have
in your army and give me only ten of my corn-
rades, who are now your prisoners, to engage them.
You shall fee, by the success, what you are to ex-
Mp from your soldiers."
cipio thought himself insulted; and with some
fn. However, the Centurion's courage and fide-
to his General merited esteem, even from an
y. But it had no such effea on Scipio; who,
ting the affront, made a sign to some of the of.
to kill the Centurion on the spot, which was
anty put in execution. He gave the like orders
the death of the other veteran soldiers, whom he
d villains pampered with the blood of their fellow-
zns As for the new raised soldiers, they were
buted among his legions.
tsar was very much concerned for the misfortune
dfe brave fellows; and he broke, with ignominy,

R 3 the

A- R. 706. the persons to whom he might- reaforably impute th

,C. ' cause of their loss; that is, those officers, whole in.

ftru&ions being to secure the coasts, and to advance
to a certain distance into the main sea, to protec ad
facilitate the approach of the transports, had bete
negligent on that important station.

About this time, Cfar's army was furprized, in
the night, by a terrible storm, attended with hailof
an uncommon size. But what contributed most
this misfortune was, that the soldiers had not any co
veniences to protect them from the inclemency
the weather; by reason, Caesar (as may easily be
by what has been hitherto related of him) did not p
his troops into winter-quarters; but was continua
changing his camp, to gain ground on the enemy,
to keep his army employed. Besides, neither ofic
nor soldier had been permitted to take their equip
or utensils with them, not so much as a vefel or
single slave. So that very few of them had tent
and the generality had made themselves a kind
covering, either by spreading their cloaths,'or'wi
mats and ruffes. Such a covering could be bu
flight protection againfi a violent form; and as
was presently penetrated, the soldiers had no o
resource than to cover their heads with their buckl
to shelter them from the weather. In a Ahortti
the whole camp was under water, the fires extingu
ed, and all their provifsons washed away orfpo
But this was only a transient accident. Juba's
proach gave far greater alarms to Cfars troo
This Prince, having received advice of the horse
gagement wherein Scipio had been worsted and I
General, in his letters, earnestly folliciting his
tance; he determined once more to come to the def
of his allies; whereupon he immediately began
march, leaving Saburn at home to carry on the
with Sittius. There were most surprising acco
published of the King of Mauritania's forces. C
thought of a very singular expedient to remove

Bldiers fears; which was to exceed even common re- A.R. 7C6.
port, in the account of his numbers. 46.
Accordingly he assembled his soldiers, and said to Suet. Cef.
hem: " I muff inform you, that Juba is hourly ex- 66.
" pe&ed, with ten legions, thirty thousand horse, one
hundred thousand light-armed troops, and three
"; hundred elephants. So that. I would have those
who are fond of news, make no further nneceffary
inquiries, nor build castles in the air, but rely on
" what I tell them, from undoubted authority:
"otherwise I will put them on board some of my oldest
" hips, and deliver them up to the mercy of the
" winds." This exaggeration produced a very ex-
traordinary effect. For when Juba came and had en-
camped his troops near Scipio, they appeared not near
so numerous as had been imagined. And in reality,
excepting the Numidian cavalry and light-armed in-
fanty, which were considerable, his whole force con-
fiied in only three legions, eight hundred horse, and
thirty elephants. So that Cfar's soldiers, having
got over the terrible idea they had formed to them-
selves of this army, their apprehensions were oon
turned into contempt, and they as much despised the
King of Mauritania, now he was present, as they had
feared him, when at a distance. If Juba, on his ar- Hirt.
rival, suffered in the esteem of Cxfar's troops, yet he "n 57'
Rtill kept the ascendant over Scipio. He began by
taking amiss, that the Roman General wore a purple
coat of mail, and had the insolence to tell him, that
he ought not to wear the fame kind of cloathing as
he did. Scipio was weak enough to comply with this
iemonftrance. He changed it for a white one, re-
signing to this Barbarian Prince the distinguishing
mark of Commander in chief. Juba was aually
more feared, and better obeyed, in Sc;pio's armyt
than Scipio himself. A Senator of that party, named
Aquinius, being in conversation, in the fight of the
two armies, with Saferna, one of Cxfar's officers,
Scipio, who had suffered considerably by desertion,
no; knowing where this conversation might end, font

R 4 him

A.R. 706. him word, that he did not do well to correspond i
* '. C. the enemy. Aquiniius paid no attentidn t thsi

primand, but pursed his dicotfife, tilt ote 6f Jc
a's guards came to him and told hih, ' he Ki n
"forbids you to continue this converfati6n." fe
sooner received this order, than he retired. In thi
hannet, did the Romaris degrade themselves, ant
through party-rage, debate the common honour of the
whole nation.

Scipio and Juba had'utfited ll their forces before
Cefar had entirely assembled his. However, it wa
not long before he received from Sicily, by different
voyages, the forces he expe&ed, and among othen
the tenth legion, who, as we have already taken no.
rice, came unordered to tender their services tO their
General; which he had affected to decline. The two
contending armies being now compleat, prepared for
acion, and frequent kirmihes happened betweeQ
them. But before I elate the military operations, I
must take notice of an example of severity, made by
Cafar in his camp, for past faults, which he had not
an opportunity of punishing, as soon as committed,

During his flav in Alexandria, and *whilst he wM
enaaged in the war against Pharnaces, there hap
pened several commotions in his legions quartered if
Italy and Sicily, which at last produced that violent
sedition, which I have already related. Cfar, who
perceived his troops knew how necefrary they were,
thought it impolitic, at that time, to push his everii
too far. But he knew well enough who were the
promoters of these disorders, and at the time I am
now speaking of, took the opportunity, which one 4f
them gave him, to disgrace them.
Hrti. C. Avienus, a military Tribune of the tenth legion,
n 4- when he set out from Sicily, had filled a hip entirely

with his own equipage and attendants, without taking
on board one single soldier. Nothing could be more
contrary to Cefar's intentions, or to the example
Athfon. which he himself et. One may guess at his real equi.

Y. 3 page in Africa, by that which he formerly brought

with

with him into Great Britain, and which conffted, ac-t i'
. cording to the teftiniony of an eye-witness, of no more 4s,
-than three saves. Cefar therefore, the day after the

arrival of the convoy we are now speaking of, as-
embled the Tribunes and Centurions of all the legions,
ind having ascended his Tribunal, addrefled them in
Bhefe terms: I could have wiihed that those, whose
l" insolence and former licentious chara&ter have given
B me cause of complaint, had been capable of amend.
i ment, and of making a good use of my mildness,
" patience, and moderation. But since they know
,, not how to confine themselves within bounds, I in-
" tend to make an example of them, according to the
" law of arms, in order that others may be taught a
" better conduct. You, C. Avienus, when you was
" in Italy, instigated the soldiers of the Roman peo-
"pie to revolt against the Republic; You have been
guilty of rapines and plunders in the municipal
t"wns; and you have never been of any real service,
either to the commonwealth, or to your General:
"lastly, in lieu of soldiers, you have crowded the
" tranports with your slaves and equipage; so that,
" through your fault, the Republic fails in soldiers,
I who at this time are not only useful but necessary.
"For all there causes, I 'break you with ignominy,
and order you to leave Africa this very day. In
like manner I break you, A. Fonteius, because you
have behaved yourself as a seditious officer, and as
a bad citizen. You, T. Salienus, M. Tiro, C.
'Clufinas, you have attained the rank of Centurions,
through my indulgence, and not through your own
merit; and since you have been invetled with that
rank, you have neither Ihewn bravery in war, nor
good conduct in peace. Intead of endeavouring
to at according to the rules of modesty and de.
cency, your whole study has been to tir up the
soldiers against your General. I therefore think
you unworthy of continuing Centurions in my
army: I break you, and order you to-quit Africa
as soon as possible." Having concluded this ter-

rible

.LR-m6. rible harangue, he delivered them over to some Cen.
A.C.c turions, with orders to confine them separately on

board a hip, allowing each of them a single slave to
wait on them. This was certainly carrying things
with a high hand, in a man, who, properly speaking,
was no more than the chief of a faction. Besides, ci.
vil wars are almost always the deftru&ion of difci.
pline: but Cafar found in himself and in the fupe.
riority of his talents, the right of making himself
obeyed.

I have mentioned, that there happened frequent
skirmishes between Cfar and his adveraries, before
they came to a general aion. The particulars of
all these operations, of less importance, are to be
seen in the Memoirs of the African war. I shall only
extra& such as appear to be of most confequenc,
and especially such as are most proper to give us a
livelier idea of, and encreafe our admiration for, Cz.
far's genius, and great abilities. For example,
give you the following inifance of his activity, and
dispatch.
t:rt. On information that a convoy of two legions h
P ' set out from Sicily, he detached two squadrons, to

facilitate and protet its arrival; one towards Thap
sus, the other towards Adrumetum. This latter ha
pened to be separated by a storm. The Commodo
by name Aquila, got under convenient shelter: an
a great many hips of his squadron anchored befo
Leptis, whilst their crews went on hore to refr
themselves, not knowing that the enemy was so ne
them. For Varus, having notice of the convoy'
failing, had come from Utica to Adrumetum, with
fleet of fifty-five ships; and being there told whatw
doing at Leptis, he took advantage of the negligen
of Cafar's people, and attacked their {hips, whi
were left almost defenceless. Many of them he burn
took two gallies of five banks of oars, and then p
ceeded to attack Aquila.

Cafar had an account brought him of this unluc
accident, as he was infpeing the works of his cam

'When
8

Whereupon he immediately took horse, went full A.- i
speed to Leptis, which was but two leagues distant, An~ C
and going on board a Brigantine, ordered all the ships
in the port to follow him, and in this manner put to
ea. He came time enough to extricate Aquila from
the danger he was in, who found great difficulty to
defend himself against so numerous a fleet. Varus,
hitherto vitorious, began now to fear in his turn,
and fought his safety in his flight. Caesar pursued
him; and not content with having recovered one of
his own gallies, and taken another from the enemy,
he followed him into the very bafon of Adrumetum,
whither they had retreated. He there offered them
battle, which they declined; and having thus com-
pelled them to own themselves in a manner defeated,
as they durst not come out of the harbour, he returned
to his camp.
On board the hip he had taken, there happened
to be P. Ligarius, the fame, who had prosecuted the
war against him in Spain, and who, instead of ac-
knowledging the conqueror's generosity, in granting
him his liberty, had joined Pompey in Greece; and
after the battle of Pharfalia, had gone into Africa to
Varus, there to continue in the service of the fame
cause. Cafar gave immediate orders for his execu.
tion: and this is the first flagrant instance of the like
rigour put in force by Cefar, and inflicted on a man
of quality of the contrary party. He certainly was
greatly exasperated against those who had rekindled
the war in Africa; and as he thought them incorri-
gible, he was of opinion, it was to no purpose to par-
don them.
When Caesar came back to camp, he wholly ap-
plied himself to the disciplining of his troops, in
order to enable them to withitand Juba's cavalry,
light-armed troops, and elephants. For when once
they came to a close engagement, his infantry had a
surprising superiority; insomuch that three or four
of his veterans have, more than once, put two thou-
flnd of the enemy's horse to flight. But this Numi-

dian

- It. 7o6. dian cavalry, and the light-armed troops that accom
ADt. C. panied it, after they were broke, eamily rallied, and

continually returned to the charge. And Casar'sek.
gionary horse were so far inferior to them, that in an
adtion wherein he was a good deal prefled, he did not
so much as susser them to engage, but entirely made
ule of his infantry against the enemies light troops,
who, as often as they repulsed them, kept retiring,
till they were afreh attacked; and in this manner e
at last got back to camp, but with so much difliculty,
and so fowly, that he was four hours going one hua
dred paces.

His troops, although excellent, were not at ail
adapted to this manner of fighting. In Gaul they
had been accustomed to fight in an open country, and
with n undesigning enemy, who seldom made us of
stratagems, and were more desirous to conquer by
force than by fraud. Here it was quite otherwise:
they found themselves in an inclosed country, and
attacked by a cunning artful enemy, who frequently
were upon them when they leait expeted; and had
no sooner alarmed them, than they were gone of
again.

So that Ciear confidered his soldiers, nor as vet
rans, who had only need to be led to battle; but
novices, who were to be formed: and he himself in.
ftruc'ed them, in the fame manner as a fencing.
malter inftru&s his scholars, hewing them how tore.
tire, how to advance, when to feint, and when to
strike home. After having exercised them some timt
in his camp, he had a mind to put them to a trial:
and in order to get provisions, he continually detached
his legions, feme one way, some another, knowing
that as the enemy's cavalry and light armed troops
were conitantly on the patrole, they must neceftrly
fall in with his people, and give them an opportunil
of putting in practice the inftrutions he had give,
them.

It will not be improper to mention another pretca
tion of his, which was, whenever his whole army wM

onl

othe march, as it was then necery the soldi' tA .
ould carry their baggage as l as arns, he took A;
care to detach three hundred cho*p men fromn ead
legion, who were difncumbered from all caEp-equi-
pge, and sornrd a kind of guard to the army. And,
he found the use of them on several occasions, wherein
they repflfed the enemy.
He was also desirous to fariliarife his foldice to
elephants, whose enomous size, together with heir
numbers, not a little scadtd his troops. For which pur-
pose he sent for some from Itly, that his fdiers
light be accufomed to the fight of thdm, and tight
have an opportunity of handling, aadexmining thlem.
IHe hewed them where they west most vulnerable,
and what part of the body of an armed elephant wa'
dcfenceefs and lay most epostd. To these inftrc-
tions he subjoined pratice, and accuftoed his cavalry
to lance at the elephants, darts, whoPe peints wer
blunted. Nay his care extended'to the very hoeses,'
which he ordered to be frequently led near the de-
phants, that they might be used t the fight, fell,
and cry of them. What General ever carried his ar-
tentions so far ? Nothing escaped him, that could be:
o use, and he thought nothing, that could be uffil,
beneath his notice.
As soon as Caesar thought his troops fuficiently
difiplined, he endeavoured to come to a deeifive
battle. At firt Scipio would not have declined it:
but it seems, the fevetal (krmifihes, in whichs maugre
the superior number of his cavalry and light troops,
he had often been worsted, had rendered him mere
circumfpe&. For now he conftaatly kept i a fitua-
tion, where, by rcafon of its natural frength, and by
the help of the works he raised, it was impoflibe for
him to be attacked. In order to draw him from this'
post, Cafar determined to besiege Thapsus; ima-
gining they would never susser a place of that impor-
tance to be taken from them, but would use their
utmost endeavours to raise the siege. As he lay but
Sxteen miles distant from Thapsus, on. the 4tb of

April

ALR s- . April he struck his tents, and the fame day came be,
At C. fore the town, and began to make the necelary dif.

positions for bfieging it. It happened as he fufpet.
ed; Scipio and Juba followed him, and came and en.
camped, in separate camps, about eight miles from
the city.

Thapsus is a maritime town, covered, in part, on
the land-side by a salt marh, between which marh
and the sea was a space of about half a mile. It was
on this fide that Scipio purposed to fling succours into
the town; but Cefar fufpeEting his design, had there
raised a fort, and lodged a good body of troops: So
that Scipio finding there was nothing to be done there,
was obliged to extend himself further along the coa4,
with intention to encamp. He had no fooper begun
laying out his camp, and railing his works, but Ca.
far, who thought it now the proper time to begin
the ation, marched up with his whole army in or-
der of battle, except two legions which he left behind
to guard his camp. He had also ent orders for ome
of his hips stationed on that coast, at an appointed
signal, to fall down, and attack the enemy in the
rear.

Scipio did not make a bad disposition. He covered
his pioneers, by his army, which he drew up at the
head of the entrenchment, and he placed his elephants
on the two wings. However, the enemy's approach
occasioned some confusion: and Cefar perceived it as
he rode along the ranks, exhorting the old soldiers
to keep up their usual bravery; and the young ones
to aspire at the glory of the veterans. In palling back-
wards and forwards, he saw a good deal of motion
and agitation among the enemy: many returned to
their camp, which was yet unfiniihed; and othen
came out in crowds, and with an air of diffidence and
fear.

This was the time to begin the attack: and it
seems beyond all doubt, by the measures Caesar had
hitherto taken, that his intention was to make ufeof
the opportunity he had been waiting for. Yet the

author

author of the Memoirs on the African war assures us, A. 7
hat he was still dubious, and undetermined, whe- .
ther he should begin the engagement. But so great
was the ardour of his troops, that the soldiers pre-
vailed on a trumpet to found the charge, without
waiting for orders: and notwithstanding all the efforts
f their officers to the contrary, they moved up to
the enemy: so that Cfar was under the neceflity of
gving way to a torrent, whose course it was out of
is power to stop, and at last gave the signal, and
made choice of the wordfelicitas for the parole of the
day.
Supposing this to be fact, Caesar's design, by this
delay, must have been to augment the ardour of his
toops. However, it was a dangerous breach of dif-
cipine, to put soldiers upon fighting, without waiting
fr the General's orders. These circumstances, and
some other inflances of the soldiers licentiousness,
which I hall observe in their proper place, seem to
confirm what is related by Plutarch; that as Ceifar n re .
as giving his orders for the battle, he was taken
withan epileptic fit, to which he was fubje&; and Suet.CC
erceiving its approach by previous convulsions, he '45
dered himself to be carried into an adjacent turret, Plut.
here he remained during the whole engagement.
he writer of the African war, being a paSsionate ad-
irer of Cafar, may possibly have suppressed this
[iagreeable and mortifying accident, which robbed
is hero of the glory of bo great a day. This omif-
on must necessarily occasion a variation in the rela-
on of the facts.
Be it how it will, there was no refflting the cou- Hirt.
ge and impetuosity of Cafar's army. The ele-n- si.
hants were first put in confusion, by the multiplicity
farrows and stones they were saluted with; and be-
oming wild through the anguish of their wounds,
ed and broke the ranks which had been placed to
uftain them. The Moorilh cavalry, being deprived
if the afllftance of the elephants, made no resistance,
id Cafar's legions, pursuing their advantage, entered

the

a. R. 7e> the camp with the flying enemy, and got poflion

c'. it. The valiant part of the enemy died in defence

their entrenchments, the ref returned to the cari
they had quitted the day before.

The ancient author whom I chiefly follow shroug
out this narration, relates here a remarkableitane
of the courage of a veteran soldier. A wounded
phant, become furious through pain, attacked an
happy attendant on the army; he had him under
of his feet, and kneeling with the whole weight
his body on this poor wretch's stomach, he there k
him in most exquisite torture, till he had put an e
to his life by repeated blows of his trunk. This i
rid scene the soldier I am speaking of, could not
hold unmoved, but immediately attacked the e
phant; who quitted the dead body, and seized
ibldier, by wrapping his trunk round him; and
this manner lifted him up in the air, all armed as
was. In this dangerous extremity, the fcfldier fu
moned all his resolution, and began cutting thee
phant cross the trunk with his sword. The pin
liged the animal to quit his hold: he dropped him
the ground, and ran roaring to the other elphan
From that time the fifth legion, to which this fold
belonged, bore an elephant in its colours.

Scipio's army was defeated, but not detroyed:
if that General had had any judgment ad prese
of mind, he might have saved a corrfiderable part
it. For great numbers, who had retired to thec
theyoccupied the day preceding the -bte, prepa
to defend it with courage, and Qslly wanted a pro
person to head them. But no such one was to
found; by reason Scipio, and all the other gen
officers, Petreius, Afranius, Labienus, had a
doned them. So that these unfortunate troops,
ceiving themselves pursued and attacked !by .the co
querors, quitted again this tecond camp, and went
seek prote&ion in Juba's. There they found
enemy, who had just made themselves matters of it
So that having now -no further hopes of relief, th

i

i down their arms and demanded quarter. But in A.R. 706.
in: Crfar's soldiers, especially the veterans, being C.
nton slaughter, and thinking any thing allowable,
er so important a vicory, put them every man to
fe word. The ancient author fays, that they com-
ired this barbarity in the very fight of Cafar, who
, not able, either by threats or entreaties, to put a
p to their fury. He adds, that they carried their
iblnce and audaciousness so far, as to wound, and

Itn kill ome persons of diftindion of their own
w, whom they fufpefeed to with well to the con-
r' p'rty. He mentions two by name; one of
cm was auall killed, the other received a wound
hi a-m, and had shared the fame fate, if he had
t dtcered himself behind the General. So many
hders do not easily agree with the command and
tl:ii'.y Cifar usually had over his troops; but
i. temn to confirm his absence during the en-
.,tenct.
Hcwever, if he had been there in person, the vic-
'could not ave been more complear. Ten thou-
i of the enemy were slain on the spot: the reft
re diicrfed by flight; and their three camps car-
lTc!l' in hand. On the conquering fide, there
re ir: fifty soldiers killed, and a small number

acci-, acording to his constant pracice, allowed
-crciy no time to recover themselves. He did
Iec oaiil to induce the Governor of Thapsus to
tep a;e townn; but not being able to succeed, he
C: :inis 1ecbilus, vith three legions, before the
. 0
Ie at the lame time cauftd rTyaurus, ano-
';:;"'rt: civ of these parts, to be invested by
L'.: , v.w:o v. :s to bfiege it v-ith two legi-
- -' I
, i i;;-lf, after l:aving recompnfhd such
i, ,:iccrs and lodicr as as ad signalized them-
t- in "'n' extraordinary manrer, dturin the cn-
';:':', !he i-t ftrward.* to red'.cc Utica, being
:.dh ¢ a body of cavalry commanded by Me!-

I. IX. S Utica

. R. 7o6. Utica had been no easy conquest, if Cato coul
Ant. C have found therein people of spirit and courage tc

46.
P;ut. Cat. second him. I have already described the ftrengtho

that place, and of its new works, as well as the pr
digious magazines of arms and provisions, which Cat
had collected, and which might have enabled th
town to hold out a long time. But the citizens hea
were for Cafar; the Romans fettled in the town we
under violent apprehensions, and the garrison was e
weak, because Cato's chief bent had been to ma
Scipio's army considerable. However, as he had be
accustomed to contend with difficulties, he determin
to try whatever was practicable, in the present fits
tion of affairs.

His firfi business was to appease the extraordina
trouble, and consternation, the news of the defeat
Thapsus had occasioned in the city. This accou
was brought in the night-time, which added to
confusion. As Utica was but three days journeyd
tant from the place where the battle was fought, th
expected, every instant, to fee the conqueror atth
gates; so that the inhabitants were disposed to aba
don the town. Cato, in order to quell the tumu
2nd to dispel their alarms, went in person from ft
to fireet, arnd insinuated, that perhaps the evil
not so great as was reported. The authority of
prelence revived their hopes,:,and for a while appea
rheir apFrehenfions.

Cato rook the advantage of this calm to assem
the council cf the three hundred, that is, all theni
loman merchants cr bankers fettled in Utica,
h.Fom he had composec a kind of senate,. fromhis
conirng to that place. To thei he also added such
nators, and ifna:ors fens, as were with him. VWh
the ccunrcil t-.s Ie.rrlir., ,. car.. in with hist
.-renity, ar.d -red to thole that were already con,e,
account of t e proviconj contailed in the magaz:
c0 the city.

As obcn as the nmembe -r L:,ad taken their feats
be an tv co.r:;:nr.~- the zeal and ftieli. ct

three hundred, of which they had given the strongest A.R. 76
proofs, in aiding the common cause with their per- 46.
ions, their money, and their advice. He exhorted
them not to let any private interest divide them, by
puiuing different measures, according to the oppor-
[unities and hopes each one might have for the afety
of his person: becaufc if they aaed with unanimity,
in cafe they determined to hold out, they would ap-
far lels contemptible to Cafar; and hould they be
ci:'ofcd to have recourse to his clemency, he would
gfili have more consideration for them. However,
he declared he left them at liberty to make their elec-
arn, nor fnould he in any wife blame them, what-
ever might be their determination. " If," fays he,
"you take the fortunate hide, I shall attribute your
change to necessity. If, on the contrary, you bear
"u against your misfortunes, and are willing to
'aiftain the burthen, and hazard the dangers of de-
renading your liberty; in that cafe I not only ap-
3p.laud you, but admire your virtue, and I offer
";v;f!lf to be your guide and companion in so noble
an enterprize; even till no further resource re-
:::;.-.: itr our suffering country; to the very last

i:.n.y. It is not Utica, Gentlemen, nor Adru-
I.t;lin that is our country; but Rome. Rome,
;, l) thlrouci a noble opposition to slavery, has of-
.-n recovered from greater calamities than those

r
.icl nw threaten lier. There are many motives
' ;o ecourage us, and we have great reafbn to hope
':' lucccis, lfpecially if we refect that our enemy
is c',bSroilcd on all fides. Spain has declared for
:G.' PL?p-.yv; and Rome itself, though fubje&
ia tl; y;'ant, bears its yoke with indignation, and

til tale the first opportunity to fiake it off. With
I-L to the hazards we mnuf run, why should
::' tcrrify us ? Let us take example by our
:-.y, who braves all dangers to commit the

r:' hor;id viclences: whereas the risk we rn, is
';jolv a ve ': happy life, if we prove victorious;

: i ,tf.il, to fl::'ethe moit lloncurab'e o all

2 " deaths.

A.R. 7o6. ".deaths. However, I would have you refle.t, be
Ant. c. c fore you determine: and I wiih, on account of

46 the- virtue and courage you have hitherto fliewn,

' 'that your determination may be to your advan-
"tage."

This speech at firLf had a furprizing effe. Some
few were struck with the reasons Cato alledged: but
the majority principally admired his generosity, intre.
pidity; and composure of mind. They even almost
forgot their distressful situation; and giving vent to a
kind of enthufinra, they beltowed large encomiums
on Cato, as aline invincible and superior to fortune
The conclusion was, that they tendered him their per
fans, their purses, and their arms, to be difpofedof
as he thought proper; being convinced, as they said
that it was more honourable to sacrifice their lives in
obedience to his orders, than to fve themselves b
betraving so eminent virtue.

But all this generous ardour was, if I may-ufe tl
expreflion, but a ass, which the firit refletion ex
tinguiiled, and w:hich ceased to blaze, as soon as i
was necessary that their actions Ihould confirm thei
words. It was proposed to set the saves atjliberty
to be employed as s'oldiers in the defence of the city
Cato, who always conformed to jufice with the grea
eft ffricnefs, said he cwuld not wrong the maters
much, as to take their slaves from them, but that
w:ould wiiiingly accept of as many as the owne
would voluntarily givc him. The Senators that wer
vith him readily came into this piopoLal: but th
three hundred, who were per'sons of trade and con
merce, and whole riches confifced in the number
their slaves, were inriantly damped at the apprehen
iions of so confide:ahle a loss: and their fear of C;
far at the fame time reviving, they quickly loft a
their zealous entiments of honour, together wit
their refpe&c for Cato. "' Who are we ? said the
" one to the other, and to whom do we refuse to fu
'c nmit ? Does not Cmfar in his single person, unite
* the forces of the e ir.e ? and are we Scipio's, P

," pey'

*s; peys, or Cato's to oppose him ? What! at a time all A. R..76'
, the earth submits to his yoke, when the molt deter- ,46-
, mined courage is not without apprehensions, fiiall
, we undertake the defence of the Roman liberty ?
, flall we dispute the poffcffion of.Utica with hii,, to
whom Cato and Pompey the Great have abandoned
Italy? and hall we set our flayes at liberty. to fight
I aainft Cafar, when wve ourselves have no more i
: berty than what he is pleased to alow us ? If we
II have not entirely loft our senses, let us be more just
" to ourselves: let us not forget the chara&ter we bear
; in life, and let the means of obtaining the Con-
" queror's clemency be our only consideration."
Such were the thoughts of froie of the most mode-
rite among the three hundred. ,.But many others did
not confine themselves to feeble'"remonftrances, but
acre villainous enough to form a'defign of seizing
tie Senators, to deliver them iup to Casfar, and by
th; piece of treachery hoped to piurchafe their peace.
Ca2. fufpeted their change: but did' not for that'al-
terhis behaviour to them, not thinking it proper to
u them under the necessity of declaring themselves.
i;t he was convinced it was next to impossible to
ink of saving Utica; and such he declared his opi-
nin in the letters he wrote to Scipio and Juba, who
iv concealed not far from that city; the one at ea
hi;nd a promontory, the other in the adjacent woods,
rd mountains, and had both applied to him for his
otc6tion, or to accompany him if he intended to
rtre.
The arrival of Scipio's cavalry, which had retreat-
f irom the field of battle towards Utica, gave Cato
re hopes; at least for some time. They were nu-
erous, and, could they have been persuaded to en-
rth.e town, futlcient to influence the citizens, and
v:r-awe the three hundred. But they were greatly
,vded as to what manner they, ihould a. Many
ti.em had thoughts of tendering their service to
ulb: whilst others were for acknowledging Cato

their Chief. And a third party, flutuating

S3 be-

A.R. 7o.'between both, had only determined not to entt
Ant' C Utica, on account of the known affecion the inha

bitants had for Cfar. In the midst of this diver
fiiy of opinions, they agreed in one point, which wa
tr fend a deputation to Cato, notifying their arrival.

Cato came out to them, attended b all the Sena
tors, except M. Rubrius, whom he left to watch .
motions of the three hundred, during his absence
He addrefTed the comrmanders of this body of ca.
valry, and intreated them not to give themlelvestq
a foreign Prince, to a Moorish King; but to prese
Cato to uba. He represented to them, how dill
nourable it would be to abandon all those illuftriou
Senators which were then present; and insinuated
that by affording a protection to the Senators, the
would no lets effect their own safety, by entering
c.tv whule forrifications rendered it impregnable
and wherein we-ic magazines of all forts for fevera
years. After this short harangue, to which the Sena
tors subjoincd thlir tears and inrreatics, the Oficer
went to consult their troops: and Cato fat hiir,.fc
down on an eminence, waiting their answer.

Here Rubrius caine to him, complaining of tl
audacioulner! of te three hundred, who had revote
and raiicd a commotion in the city : a fresh cu!e o
telror and coni1crnation to the Senators, and a fur
ther trial of Cato's conifancv. He ued his ende
vours to hearten the Senators, and sent back Rubric
to Utica, with odcis to the three hundred to
cuiet and wait his return. The cavalry's anl'er
v.hich he received loon after, served to augment h
difficul1ies. They declared that they had no inclin
tion ror Tuba, nor any apprehensions of Cxfar, whe
once rtev wcre under Cato's command; but tha
thev could not tru!t the inhabitants of Utica, orig
nal, Phacricins, and as perfidious as had former
Leern their brother Carthaginians. " If this ficklt
-'* -.t;:'ul people," said they, " remain at prefen
" G...:, it is onv till Cfar's arrival. Let him
" Il. c-ce at their gates, and they will join hi

" again.

, agaainft us. If therefore you are willing to make A R. 6.
use of our afitance, you mutt previously kill or 4.C
, expel all the Uticans. Then we will undertake
the defence of the city, when cleared of its Barba-
rian enemies." Cato thought the proposal made
t him by the cavalry, as unreasonable as cruel: how-
ever, he mildly answered them, that he mufft first re-
turn into the city, to take the opinion of the three
hudred.
The complaints brought to him of the merchants
and traders were but too well founded. He found
then very resolute; no longer eeking pretences to
aliate their difaffe&ion, but declaring frankly that
tvas very odd, people should think of forcing them
to make war against Cefar, when they had neither the
power nor inclination to do it. There were even
'one who explained themselves pretty fully on the
Project of seizing the Senators, and delivering them
p to Ceflar. But Cato took no notice of what they
|d with refpeEt to this last design, pretending not to
iathem: and which he might do with the greater
;,r of truth, as he atuallv was a little deaf. How-
.er, it gave him the deepest concern. He now made
I his great and only application how to secure the
i:ics and retreat of the Senators. As, from the dif-
ofition he saw people in, he had given over all hopes
fIdfen.ding Utica, he determined not to survive its
i': but he did not think for that reason, that he
%J!: to be unconcerned as to what became of his fol-
iwers; and though ie was indifferent as to the safety
c his own person, yet he made it his chief attention to
pFocure the safety of his friends.
His apprehensions therefore redoubled, when word
als brotliht him, that the cavalry, weary with wait-
. g for his answer, were marching off. He rose from
teat, and went to a place from whence he could
da:ver them, where perceiving that they were ac-
,!y upon their march, he immediately took horse
;,i purlued them. Upon his coming up to them,
:.' received him with joy, and advised him to save

S 4 him-

A.R. 76. himself in their company. But that being the fur
Ant. C. theti from his thoughts, he earnestly entreated them

and, as it is reported, joined tears to his entreaties
that they would protec the Senators in their retreat
and extricate them from the dangers they were ex.
posed to, in the midst of a perfidious people, hc
had already meditated their ruin. He neglected no.
thing which could induce the soldiers to relent, 0o
excite their compafnion: he extended his arms to
them, turned their horses heads, and embraced the fol.
diers in their armour. At length he prevailed witl
them so far as to consent to halt one day; and o
their return posted ome at the gates of the city, an
others he entrusted with the care of the citadel.

The three hundred, alarmed at this proceedinr
enrt to Cato to desire him to come to council. N
thing can be a frronger proof of the power an ex
alted virtue has over mens hearts, than the fentimen
cf admiration, tenderness, and refpe&t, which eve
peroin then in Utica testified for Caco. Theywer
all divided in interest and opinion, and ready to be
come each other's enemies, and to cut each other'
throats ; yet they all agreed in admiring and cherift
ing a single man, who maintained tranquillityan
peace in the ridir of so many minds, diftracedb
fear, or exasperated through party-rage. When Cat
received the -mel:age from the three hundred, the Se
nators eineavoured to dissuade him from complyin
with i, and told him they could never content to de
liver up their prote&or and preserver t infidels an
traitors. But Cato knew there was no cause to
alarmed; and having represented as much to the Se
nators, he w ent unattended to the council.

The members thanked him greatly for the confi
dence he repoc-d in them, and protested their zeal
serve him in any other manner but in war; and en
treated him, if they were not Cato's, and could no
attain his exalted sentiments, to have compaflion o
their inability. They added, that they had comet
a reolutic to ed eputis to Cxfar to
i mplore hi

dcle

demency :.,but that the. firt: and: principal; obje& of A;R.os6.
Iheir follicitations thould be, Cato, for whom if they,- i'6.
could not obtain a proteaion, they would not accept
ny pardon for themselves, but would:fightrin his -de-
ience, to the last moment of'their lives; ;:
Cato acknowledged himself obliged to them for
their good intentions, approved of their design of
ubmitting to Cfar, and advised them to loie no
time. But forbid them to make any mention of him
intheir folliitations. " It is for the *vanquished,
"said he, to have recourse to prayers, and for those
"vho are in fault to 'sue for pardon. As'for me, I
" have been invincible during the whole course of my
"life, and even now am as victorious as I with to be,
"and triumph over Cefar by the superiority ofjuftice
:"and equity. It is he that is conquered; it is he that
,is overpowered: being this- day attainted and con-
"vided by undeniable evidence (notwithstanding he
"has always denied it) of plotting againif his country."
Cato, as he came out from this conference with the
three hundred, received intelligence that Caesar was
on his march with the greaterf part of his forces, to
besiege Utica. " Alas ! fays Cato, he pays us a com-
pliment we certainly do not deserve; he takes'us
for men."
Another message, which he received presently as-
te, gave room for another very judicious refle&tion-of
is. M. Odtavius sent to let him know that he was
near Utica with two legions, and was ready to join
him, but that it was necessary first to fettle which
of them hould command in chief. Cato returned
no answer to the meflage: but addrefing himself to
his friends: " Well, fays he, ought we to be fur-
priid that our affairs have not succeeded, when at
" te very infrant of our deffruhion, we are contend-
ing for the vain ambition of commanding ?"
t K ;kr27utPs 7p si. t rv, X
¢di av r
P r
o tp; tps.ti A'ly. zrc Jia '
.Vi
.- ¢ s.r;l s'raj 2f#s0r1 tv st$oyr , cM 1] YK
T V SC 6ó'ó r:'.h/? S iE xplTrE Ki-
s Ir Sei
; tr ,
r iw ' Ior
e cji
O a yip
lc::4i?;;Mor I ai2 r5 #Tp i '.cs 0ir#ihJ ls
yI v xsr s9
Vh / 9x iir&tgaji. XL FL U T.

The

A R.76. The time granted by the cavalry was now expired,

4. C who, when they left the city, gave Cato a fresh op.

portunity of displaying his zeal for justice and ho.
nefty. They began plundering Utica, which the}
confidered as an enemy's town. Cato was no soonel
apprised of this outrage, than he hastened to put a
flop to it. He snatched their unjust booty out of the
hands of ome of the firit who came in his way; and
the refe being confounded by his presence, immedi.
atelv dropped what they were carrying off, andex.
prefing their fame of such a proceeding by their
silence and dwncaft looks, departed for the territo-
ries of King uba, there o put themielves under his
protection. They were accompanied by some Sena.
tors, particularly by Faustus Sylla, who gave to each
of them an hundred Iefterces. And if credit may be
rD B.A. given to the author of the Memoirs of the African
" I" v war, Cato was obliged to make them the likepre-

fcnr to prevail on them to Ipare the inhabitants of
Utica.

Molf of the Senators had preferred escaping by
fa, to putting themselves under Juba's protecion,
and therefore continued vet in the city. As their
danger increased by the cavalry's going off, and more
so by C;iar's approach, Cato took the last meafurcs
for hafcening and securing their retreat. He kept all
the gates of the city shut, except that leading to the
tea : he provided vefels for them, distributed money
to tich as might want it, gave directions for the em-
barkation, and ued all endeavours to prevent the
confusion which commonly attends a precipitatere-
treat. He took leave of ome who were for immedi-
ately ettin2 out, and persuaded others to follow them,
who through their attachment to him, were inclined
to stay. There was only his son and one Statilius,
who could not be prevailed on to leave him.

He did not much endeavour to dissuade the former,
thinking he ought not to oppose his filial piety and
natural tenderness. With relpect to Statilius, he made
:Te or the mos cogent arguments, on account of

that

that Senator's known aversion to Cafar. But he was A.R, 706.

Ant. C.
young man full of fire, who piqued himself on his 4A6.
contancy and greatness of foul, and a great itickler
for Cato. He therefore adhered to his determina-
tion; and Cato finding him inflexible, said to two
philosophers who confantly attended him: It is
, your business to bend that flubborn resolution, and
" ive it a more useful turn."
The Senators were not the only objects of Cato's
care. As his own particular safety was no longer his
concern, he seemed to be more tenderly concerned for
the safety of those about him. He now permitted the
common people, whom he had compelled to encamp
without the walls, to return into the city. And as
these citizens had been always inclined to Cfar, he
begged of them to intercede for the three hundred,
who, till the battle of Thapsus, had been of the re-
publican party; to make it one common cause with
tosie Romans established among them, and mutually
zoendcavour to procure their common safety.

cNt content with this, he did a remarkable piece
If ervice for the three hundred, and directly opposite
to is own private opinion. L. Caesar, a relation of
the Ditator, (but of a branch which had always de-
clred againit him, and appeared strongly attached to
he cause of liberty) however, probably confiding in
his alliance of blood, had continued in Utica, and
rtrn undertook to address the Dictator, in behalf of
the three hundred. As he judged it necessary to
pF'pare a speech for this occasion, he begged Cato
to alift him in the compoition: Cato, who at all
ether times so greatly affested state, and avoided all
ppearance of condescension, consented to it: and
mnployed the most favourable expressions to represent
the cause, and fought the n-oft ipecious pretences to
xcufe the behaviour of the three hundred.
This L. Ca:far offered to be mediator for Cato.
" I will throw myself," laid he, " at the Dictator's
" feet, I will embrace his knees." " By no means,"
e.jlid Cato; " were I disposed to owe my life to

" Cefar,

AR. 7o6." C far, I myself should be the properef person t
Ant. c- go to him. But I do not intend to be obliged t

" him for the injustices he commits. For it is unjul

in him to pardnc as a mater, persons, over whon
he has no right, nor lawf.l power." So that Cate
when L. Cfar let our, contented himself with re
comrrending his son and friends to him.

These diTerent occupations employed him a whoh
night and great part of the next day. As oon as h,
returned to his own house, lie affimbled all his famil
that is his friends and his ibn; and among other dil
courle, he forbid his son to have any snare in thead.
miniiLration of pubic ast..i;-. "' You cannot do it,"
fa;d he to him, " in a ;iainnr worthy the name you

bear: t,) do it upon any cther conditions, were
" baie a: . iilada -u;.: '

IIte aftcw;vards -'nt into the bath, and there cal.
linS to mn.r.d Sta;.:ilu, enquired after him of Apollo-
nides, one cf thle two Ih:ilo'bphers recommended to
persuade him to conluit his o.n !hfcty. " Have vou
, fuccdc.' d," iaid he, " v. ith Statilius ? is he gore
'; nrl:sti t akin le ave of us :" " No," replied the
F'p!olopher, " he is uni:erable, and declares he wil
'; ",~,,lu;.lv stay here, and do as you do. Catt

.-c -l and o;:r made ani.ver, ,Vc flall soo be ab!e
. '
tc ::,i_e o t;lt.:
A,-,r bahin , 1. l;pi-pei iV ';t a great deal ofconm

-; : \riynvited al ii iriends and the niagi
a:-- rc.. the c.':. 'I ley at late at table, andtk
conve;raLti.n w s livcly, Say and infirucive, turnin
Oil ce,:.ln
Cc 1 .ts ofi- cdal philoopliy. But some
bodv 1 -.c;i: chagd the diicourl; to the paradoxe
of t..c :S! , lch as are these maxims, " Thatthe
" wi i m.an a:.;- is s:r-ee,-I ha: the vicious are slaves,
w.i.ich Det".c:rius a Peripa:eic Philosopher, then i
coman-, undertook to refue- f-ro the principles
his lfe. Cato v.-as extremely warm with him, ad
treated the matter lo amply, and spoke with so nmch
f.re, earneinefs, and vehemence of voice, that hebe
trav-ed hiilr;if, an.d conii-med the suspicions hs

fricri

fiends had already conceived, of his design to kill A.R. 706.
himself. As soon as he had finished his discourse, a Ant. c.
melancholy silence diffused itself through the whole
company. Cato perceived it, and to divert their con-
cern, spoke of the present situ'ation of affairs, and of
fch persons as were on their return, exprefling his un-
:inefs on their account, from the storms that some
,;Kt be exposed to, and from the dry sandy deserts
Li others must be obliged to pals.
In this manner the fpper ended: after which
CLo lvalked for ome time, as was his constant prac-
Itc; and having given his orders to the officers of

i guard, he retired to his apartment, where he be-
rv.i with unusual tendernels to his son and to all his
.i:.s: this renewed and confirmed their suspicions
c:L ;: *.al resolution he had taken.
\lWhen he cme into his chamber, he laid himself
e his bed, and took up Plato's dialogue on the i-
n'ct;ii of the foul: and having made a confider-
ia prCreis in it, happening to cast his eyes on the
'i.Ld c£ his bed, he was much furprized not to fee
.: 'crd there ; which had been taken away by his
;:' cidcl, while they were at supper. Cato called
a.ilrc, d
a ked him, hat was become of his
crmr; and receiving no anfwc:, reflumed his reading.
o:.e time after he again aftked for his word, but
:!out any hurry, or pafion, as if he had no parti-
? nr design. When he had done reading, perceiving
e: nobcdy vwas disposed to bring it him, he called all
: fL es one after the other, and raising his voice,
i them, he was determined to have his sword. His
_An carried him so far as to itrike one of them with
i.i'i lo violently on the mouth, that his hand was all
.!. " What then?" said he with indignation,
c o my fan and family conspire to deliver me, to my
C''n,;, unarmed and defenceless "
r';,cn me in his son, accompanied by his friends,
[r. iti tears in his eyes beibught hiin, in the most
'"''-'. m~anner, to be prevailed on to charge his
t'"-*.:i'n. Cato got up, and with a look that be-

poke
6

A. R. 706. spoke his resentment: " Since when, then," said h
Ant. C " have I loft my senses, that my Ion is become a

" keeper? I am treated just like a madman. A
"one makes use of argument or persuasion to u
"deceive me, if I am in an error; but I am tot
"prevented disposing of my person, by beingdi
· armed. Brave and generous on, why do you n
" put your father in chains ? why do you not tie m

hands behind me, till Cefar come and find eic
"capable of defence ? Had I a mind to destroy m'
"seif, I could equally effecst it without a sword

since by holding my breath for ome moments, o
"only once dashing my head against the wall, I colk

dispatch myself, were I so disposed." Thefc terl
b'e words, which certainly exceed what ought to b
1iiled courage, so shocked young Cato, that he retir.
ed with loud lamentations.

His father, being now alone with the philosophers,
Demetrius and Apollonides, spoke to them more
mildly. " Do you also, said he to them, approve o
" forcing a man of my years to live, against his in-
" clination, and of keeping a constant watch overlhi
" ations ? Or have you any reasons to alledge, to
"convince me, that it is not unworthy Cato, nor
"scandalous for him, to owe his safety to his enemy'
" Why then do not you display these arguments, ti
': new to me; that by renouncing the maxims where.-

in wve were educated, and growing wiser by Cafir's
" leffcns, we may still be the more obliged to him?i

As et I have determined nothing as to the trea-,
" fures I shall pursue; but that determination oce
" made, I must be at liberty to carry it into execu.

tion. I will partly take it into consideration w:th
you, and demand your aftliance in explaining to
me the principles of ph!!oiFphy, which you both
" teach and pracrile. Cease then your apprehenf-

ons : go, and tell my for, not to undertake to re
"his father to what he cannot persuade him to." It
is pretty odd that Cato mfould that infant deny his
ihaving determined how to act. All his preceding

beha-1

behaviour seems openly to declare the contrary; and A. R. 7G6-
I fee not how he can here be excused his want of A46C
sincerity.
Demetrius and Apollonides made him no answer,
but retired weeping. A young slave brought him
his sword: Cato drew it, examined it, and finding
the point to be harp and fit for execution, " Now,"
fays he, " I am my own master." He laid down his
tword, took up his book, and read it from the be-
einning to the end. Plutarch assures us, that he as-
terwards slept, and so soundly, that those who wait-
ed without, and listened at the door, heard him snore.
However, it does not seem very credible, that be-
tween the yiolent agitation he had been so lately in,
and the moment preceding his death, he could enjoy
an uninterrupted sleep. One would be more apt to
think, that by his affe-cation of tranquillity, he hoped
o augment the false glory he expe6ted from a vo-
luntary death.
About midnight he called two of his freedmen;
one of which, named Cleanthes, was his Physician or
Surgeon; the other, by name Butas, was principally
Imtrufed with the management of his affairs. He
dfpatched this latter to the sea-side, in order to fee
:nd let him know if every body was embarked. The
crvice Cleanthes did him, was to dress his hand,
hich had got an inflammation, occasioned by the
violent blow tie had given his slave. Cato, by this
application to his hand, gave fresh hopes and com-
tor[ to his family, who concluded he had not re-
nonced life, since he was still careful of his body.
Butas returned, and brought word that every body
Was embarked but Crassus, who was then going on
board: but that the wind was very high, and the ea
very rough. These last words drew a sigh from Cato:
he lamented those who under such circumstances were
obliged to put to ea. He ent Butas a second time
to the port, to fee if there might not be tome one,
'ho in the hurry of the embarkation had forgot tome
nccffary provisions, and been obliged to put back to

Utica.

A.R. 7o6. Utica. It was now near break of day; and Cato, i
An c we may believe Plutarch, slept a little more. But be.

ing interrupted by Butas, who loon returned, and a.
fured his patron that all was perfe&tly quiet, Cato or
dered him to Ihut the door, and before he left the
room, flung himself upon his bed, as if he intended
to finiih his night's reft.

He was no sooner alone than he fabbed himself
with his sword, a little below his chest; but not with
that violence he intended, on account of the indifpo.
fition of his hand. So that he did not die immedi.
ately, but in struggling he fell from his bed, andover.
turned a table he made use of for geometrical figures.
At the noise hle made in his fall, his iervants gave a
hriek, ar.d his ion and friends immediately entered
the rccm. Thv found him swimming in his blood,
and his bowels fallen out at the aperture of the wound,
Hlowever, he was still alive, and could yat fee. The
Surceon came, and eeing the intestines were not
wounded, was for replacing them and fewing up the
vcur.d. But when Cato had recovered his senses, and
underfLood their intention to preserve his life, he puflhed
the Surgeon from him, and with a fierceness, the very
relation of w.hich makes one tremble, tore out his
bowels and exrired.

Such was Cato's death: a death celebrated by all
antiquit ,; bt'. which the pr iciples of our holy reli
Eicn mullt condemn, and which realon it-elf cannot
approve. I do not here intend to expatiate on thole
principles, which incontestably prove suicide to be
criminal: but shall confine myielf to what is proper
to mv ubicc; and onlv desire that my readers, in
recolecicng the fliort obfervaticrns I have interflerlcd
in this rarration, -ould be p!eacd-- to add one inle
renection more, arising from the facts themselves.
\' hich is, that it is evident, that plrie was the motive
of Ca-o's defperre resolution, ani hat, by the as-
tancz cf that vice only, he surmounted the fear of
:ith, which he looked upon as a weaknels. PluI
rrch -makes him fiy to himfeif that it would

fh .c-

ihameful and unworthy of him to owe his life to C- A. R. 706.
far. These were his apprehensions. He could nor Aut c.-
support the thought of such an humiliation: and that
he might not be obliged to his enemy for his life, he
preferred depriving himifelf of it, by an at of despair.
It is true, this pride, in his conceit, passed for a vir-
tue. But it was certainly a vice, being condemned
by all religion, and even by morality. However, I
will go still further; and think I can convi& him from
his own principles.
The virtue, which he most piqued himself upon,
during the whole course of his life, was an invincible
constancy superior to all events. If so, it is evident
that his death was the effet of a sudden loss of cou-
rage, of a lassitude of contending, and of a dejeaion
of mind which would not permit him to perlfit in his
opposition. The remains of Pompey's party began to
revive in Spain, and became afterwards very formida-
5le. So that to have kept up to his characer, Cato
ought to have yet tried that resource: and to kill him-
iels, while yet any hopes subsisted, was deviating
from his principles, and abandoning too loon the caule
of liberty.
So that I am very far from confidering Cato's death
as an at of heroism. It is in his attention to the
afety of his friends, when he himself made his life
no longer his care; it is in his invariable humanity
o the three hundred, and the inhabitants of Utica;
i is in his love for justice, which induced him to
oppose all violence in those of his own party; it is in
efe circumstances alone that I find him the true
ero.
This generous humanity was not only remarkable
the latter part of his life: it was the conRfant di-
etorof his ations and condu&t: I know that this is
ot the idea commonly formed of Cato. Resolution,
aughtinefs, and an austerity approaching to bruta-
v, are the qualities most usually attributed to him.
his idea, though just, yet is not compleat; and to
nter entirely into his chara&er, it is necessary to add
VOL. IX. T to

A.R. . 6 to his opposition to vice, his comparnon for the of-
An. C. fenders: a compalion, not the effect of mere opi.

nion, fubjeft to changes and caprices; but proceed.
ing from right reason, and always the fame, because
founded on unalterable principles. This is evident
in his tender friendship for his brother, in his regard
for Murana, whom he impeached, in the tears he
shed on feeing the slaughter of his fellow-citizens,
lafly, in his moderation and mildness to all with
whom he had to contend in the defence of the li.
berty and laws of his country. I except only Cafar,
who, doing evil methodically, and going the horteft
way to tyranny, without ever deviating from his
plan, could be confidered no otherwise by Cato than
as a common enemy, against whom the whole state
ought to rile up in arms, and who ought to be treated
with severity, because there were no hopes of his
amendment.

If to there two principal parts of his character, re-
solution and humanity, be added his elevated genius,
the extent and fagacitv of his views, his indefatigable
application to bufinels, and his purity of manners,
we shall find, notwithstanding some defects which w
have occalionally taken notice of, that he ought to be
esteemed one of the most valuable and virtuous men
Paganism ever produced: nor need we be furprized
that Virgil * has placed him in the Elysian fields a
the head of the friends to virtue: and perhaps w
mrav think the high compliment paid him by Livy
and reported by St. Jerom, not ill applied. " Cato?
iid that judicious writer, has been celebrated, an
conrmr.ned, by two of the greatest genius's that eve
exiited. But no one could either add to his reput:
tion bv comnmendations, or detract from it by censure.
The two great genius's Livy peaks of, are Cicero an

* Secretcfqu pos, 'is dr-nterr jura Catonem. VJRG. AEn. 1.VI
- t(. :us oriae neque proflijt quifquam laudando, nec vituperan
,- ,..-.-n ecuit, c"urn utrumque fummis praditi fecerint ingenl
L:-. -Sucd iieen.. i'rob. I. II. in Ofcam.

CaXs

far. The firt had composed a pahegyricon CatoA; R,^o.-
hich is loft, and which he called by.ihe name of his A'e
tro. The latter arrfvered it in two trafts, intitled
Anticatones," but neither of them survived the.work
teyendeavoured torefute.
The only circurtnlqance wherein Cato's -condu&lof
e teems reproachable, and wherein it.is most diffi-
tultto excuse him, was his behaviour to his wife
larcia. e had several children by her, and she
sa;uacllly big-at the time Hortenfius took it intp

clhead to ask him for her. Cato :readilyagreed to
ie resigning her, and as soon as he had procured her
therPhilippus's content, gave her away. himself in
marriage to Hortenfius. But Hortenfius dying soon
;er, an l bequeathing his great riches to Marcia, .in
irejudice of his son, who was somewhat dissolute;
atomade no scruple to retake her. From thence
Cfar has taken occasion to tax Cato with having
:nfa&ted this whole afair through a fordid principle.
Bat Plutarch pretends that such an accusation is re-
sued in the very proposition, and that it is the fame
tg to tax Hercules with cowardice, as to charge
Cat with avarice. The thing certainly admits of
mre difficulty, or rather is absolutely inexcusable.
ha allowing what Strabo has advanced to be true, Strabo. .
:e Cato in that only followed a long eftablilhed cuf- XI. p.
tn among the Romans; that pretended custom is 515
conrrarry to common honesty, and morality, that
i.wouid have been more becoming a person of his

ueniTy to ppofe it, than to give it a fanAion by his
Cinple. Cato was forty-eight years old when he died: and
te place of his death has occasioned his being Ifiled
ri hitor, Cato of Utica, to distinguish him from
to the Cn , his great-randfather.
In an initant the news of Cato's death was spread
trouih the city ; wlnch drew an incredible concourse,
';ril of the three hundred, as of the Uticans, about
hise. They made the air resound with eco-
1;"-::j an the dead hero, tiling him their benefactor,

T 2 their

A^R-7.6. their saviour, alone free and invincible; and in

46. dulged these their transports, notwithstanding the

knew Cafar was so near them. But neither the ap
prehensions of the conqueror's resentment, nor an
inclination to flatter him, nor their own private feud
were capable of damping their zeal for honourin
Cato's virtue. They solemnized his obsequies wit
great pomp, and ere&ed a monument to him neart
lea-fhore, where, in Plutarch's days, was extant
statue of Cato, holding a sword in his hand.

His very enemies could not refute him their co
mendations. The author of the Memoirs of
re. Afr. African war, all devoted as he is to Cafar, confir
^"' ' Cato's integrity, and acknowledges that he was

tremely different from the reft of the chiefs of
conquered party.

Caesar being informed of his death, broke outi
this exclamation: "0 Cato ! I envy you the gl

of your death: for you have envied me that
" saving your life." Whether he spoke sincerely
expressing his desire of saving his most implaca
enemy, is what Plutarch thought he might have
bertv to doubt. And this doubt he founds on
heavy invectives with which Cafar had filled hisA
ticatones. How could he have spared living, fays
historian, the man, to whose very memory he
shewn so deadly an hatred ? This argument may
supported by two considerations; one taken from
lively resentment Cafar shewed, as I have alre
taken notice of, and which I ihall have a further
portunit) of observing, againif those who had kindi
the war in Africa: the other, which is full as weigh
may be drawn from the impossibility of Cato
CJfar's ever agreeing in the fame manner of th
ing, acting, or speaking. However, Plutarch de
mines in Cafar's favour: and it is certain that the
traordinary instances of clemency he has liewn,
* -;r, c:r TU ' .
f£
&r
-'i*'t ; ( Ms - Yr t
A i
T - . &C aCit.n

e infinite honour such an at of generosity would A.R.7o06
have done him, are motives which frengthen the pro- 46.
lability of this conjecure. Especially, if Cato had
ut in execution the scheme he had formed, on a sup-
ofiion that affairs might have taken another turn,
f confining himself to some distant island, there to
ass the remainder of his days in quiet, I cannot think
hat Cefar would have sullied his glory by the death
of so virtuous a man.
He was not far from ica, at the time Cato killed DeB.Afr.
limfelf: and in his passage he had taken the city of S'c .
IUfczta, where Scipio had colleted great magazines i n. 75,
he had also made himself master of Adrumetum,
where he mer with QLigarius, whose life he par-
doned, but would not permit him to return to Rome.
Before he entered Utica, he was met by L. Cefar,
who proftrating himself before him, obtained for the
p:fent the pardon he sued for. However, he did not
njoy it long. The Dictator could not but resent the
behaviour of this his young relation, who had on all
ocrafions flewn himself his implacable enemy, had
treated several of his domestics with more than ordi-
nrv cruelty, and had ordered the beasts to be killed,
which the Conqueror had reserved for the games he
intended to give the Roman people. So that some
time after he called him to an account for the above-
nentioned irregularities, and without pronouncing
iZs condemnation, stirred up the soldiers to kill him.
as it were in a mutiny. He was more sincere inDeB.Afr.
pardoning several Romans of high rank, who had
nntinued in Utica, the most eminent of whom was
Cato's son.
The citizens, who had always been staunch to him,
'ad nothing to expec but commendations and re-
'ards. Not so the three hundred; who, as they
ad served both Scipio and Varus, with inclination and
ieion, during the whole course of the war, and had
ad no other inducement to fide with Caesar than his
s'cefs, were under mortal apprehensions. Cefar's
dfgn, however, was only to punish them in their

T 3 pocket:

A. R. 7o6 pocket: but he began by intimidating them with a
At C. ong and enforced invetive, wherein he greatly ex.

aegerated their pre:cnded crime. Then growing mil
der, he promised them their lives, but declared that
their eff.ccts should be fold, which, however, were
be redeemable on payment of a certain tax. Th
three hundred, who expected to have been treated
with the utmofl rigour, submitted with joy and gra
titude to the penalLies prcfcribed them. They onl
desired Caeiar to impose a ieral tax, and leave th
affefrent of it to them. This was doubtless what he
gs6:sco:. wanted ; so that he taxed them at two hundred mil-

lions of efterces, to be paid at fix equal payments into
the public reaifry of the Roman people, in the space
of three years. These were the terms Cafar made use
of but at that time the Roman people had nothing
Ifet bu: the name ; the real power and authority, as
well as the management of the finances were solely
vested in the DiCracor.

Bv this time Juba wa returned to his kingdom,
afcer a very fatiguing retreat, marching only in the
nigh:, and ccnccaling h!imn:!f during the day, infuch
cottaes as hb met with in his route. As Sabura his
.Licu:cnantr hadJ ken deicated and killed by Sittius,
;e had r o cichr hc-pe le-i: than to shut himself up in
Zarma, his capital, which he had taken care to wel
fortify. But he found by experience that a goverr.
ment m ntainted by cruilty and barbarity, creates in-
ideli;v in its iubjects.' Before he proceeed on his
expecition, ihe had ordered a great pile to be ereted
on the market-place of Zarra, ;nd declared he irtended,
in ca:e he
he iould be d(fcatcd, to p;u all the inhabit-
ants to death, and then place their bodies, himself,
his treasure, his wives and children on the pile, tob
there confured by the flames. So desperate a reiolu-
ticn had fruck the inhabitants of Zama with horror;
tb that they w-ere not at all displeased to hear of Cx
i's ;-cceis and when Juba thought to have entered
rhe crv. they shu.t the gates againfi him. He at ir,
.T;n.;edi .is' authority, and thl:eatencd them; but

Sinding it to no. purpose, he next had recourse to en- A. R.7o,6
treaties, though with. no better success: he then de- An C
ired only to have his wives and children delivered up
to him, but this request was also denied him. Where-
upon he retired to his palace in the country, attended
by Petreius, and a few horsemen who had accompa-
nied him. Even in this abandoned state he was yet
formidable to the inhabitants of Zama; and they sent
deputies to Cafar to desire him to come to their as-
Gifance. Caesar, who was then at Utica, set out the
next day. He found the whole country open to him,
nd every body fought his protection. And now the
unfortunate Juba, having no resource left, determined
tdie. Petreius and he agreed on a duel, with intent
mutually to kill each other. But the stronger too ea-
,lv triumphed over the weaker, and Petreius alone
was killed. Juba attempted to stab himself; but not
having resolution enough to effe& it, ordered one of
his laves to kill him.
The Conqueror's fortune bore down all before it,
Wiah such irresistible rapidity, as entirely to extirpate
the remains of the conquered party. The cities of
Tyldrus and Thapsus, which Cfar had ordered to
be belieged by his Lieutenants, were not long before
ievy urrendered. Faustus Sylla and Afranius, who
eJ with a body of fifteen hundred horse, and were
,aluing for Spain, fell in with Sittius, who had de-
,eted Sabura. This body was by him routed and
dii:erfed, and the two Chiefs were taken prisoners.
Nor had Metellus Scipio better success in his flight.
He had collected twelve ihips, with which he purposed
toget to Spain. But having been obliged, through
itref o£ weather, to put into Hippo, he there fell in
ith Sittius's fleet, and was instantly surrounded. As Sen. Ep.
he perceived there was no preventing his hips being ii 4-
akn, rather than fall into Caesar's hands, he stabbed
himnelf, and in his last moments gave an inltance of
his reatnels of foul. For when some of the enemy's
ioi. irs, who had boarded his hip, enquired, what

T 4 was

A.R. -6. was become of the General? he replied with hisdy.

A- C ing voice, " The General is safe."

All Caesar's enemies in Africa being thus ruined,
the Conqueror allowed himself some time for calming
the country, and for making a distribution of rewards
and punishments according to the different fervics
that had been done him. He reduced Numidia toa
Roman province, and gave the government of it to
Sallust, who exercised there such flagrant opprefflions,
ao. that it gave room for Dio to conjecure he had Cafar's
i. XLlI. express orders for so doing, and that he was not so

much deputed to govern Numidia, as to plunder it
The fame Dio remarks, that this conduct of Salluftis
frill the more blameable, as he affeas throughout his
works an air of probity, not to fay severity: so that
though he, through Cafar's protection, on quitting
his government escaped a judiciary condemnation, he
nevertheless is condemned, which is frill more scan.
dalces, by his own writings.
DeB arr. Among the Numidians Cfar diftinguiihed those
AFFppr. of Zama, and rewarded them for having ihut their
Cv.l.iv. gates against their King, by a total exemption of

ta:es. Sittius, who had done him such signal service,
was by him, together with his people, put in poses.
sion of Cirta, which had formerly been the royal city
of Masinissa and of Syphax, and which from the
name of its new inhabitants has since been called the
"Colony of the Sictians."

In the penalties he inflited, he was guided by his
aversion to cruelty, and by his covetousness after mo-
ney. So that he took care not to extend his resent-
ment to Juba's son, who was yet a child; buthe
DeB.. Af.2ade a sale in Zama of his entire patrimony, and of

the ects of the Roman citizens who were fettled
there, and had appeared in arms againftt him. On his
rturn to Utica, he in like manner confiscated and fold
the efecis of all who had had the rank of Centurion
un. e: ietreius, and under Juba. He taxed the ci-
ies ., Adrumerum and Thapsus, and exaaed a

yearly

terly revenue in oil and corn, from Leptis andA, R 76'

Ant C.
fdrus. 46.
Of the Romans of distinction, of whose fate vic-
y had given him the disposal, two were put to
th, Faustus Sylla and Afranius. And though the
thor of the Memoirs of the African war fays, that
iiswas in consequence of a sedition among the fol-
ry, yet it is easy to fee that this commotion was
effec of Cefar's policy. And, indeed, all other S^ut C.c
ters ascribe their death to his orders. Doubtles For. L.
thought he had a right to treat Afranius with rigour, IV. C.
ho,though he had given him his life in Spain, hadD'
posed him afresh both in Theflaly and Africa; and
en at the time he was taken by Sittius, was making
eparations to go and join Pompey's son in Spain.
auftus was not only Pompey's fon-in-law, but the son
Sylla, to whom Caesar had ever had a violent aver-
:, and whose schemes he had constantly endeavour-
to subvert. However, he spared Pompeia the wife
5Faustus Sylla, and her children.
Afranius, Faustus Sylla, and L. Cafar are the only
rns of note, whose blood Cafar spilt after the bat-
of Thapsus; which, however, is a considerable
ception to the encomium bestowed on his clemency
Cicero, when he asserts generally, " * that the ci-

wns which the Republic loft, were carried off by
ecommon chance of war, and not through any re-
tnment of the conquerors."
But those three excepted, his rigour to the van-
ihed extended no further than banishment. This
the only diftintion he made between those, who
adily submitted after the battle of Pharfalia, and
, whose obstinacy obliged him to conquer them
second time in Africa. The first, for the most part,
re immediately restored to all their former privi-
es; and a banishment from Italy, and Rome, was
epunifhment of the obstinacy of the latter. Yet Di.
'Quos amifimus clves, eos Martis vis perculit, non ira viforia.
,. pro Marc. n. 17.

he

A.R.7o6. he permitted all his friends and principal officers to
AtC. exempt each his friend from this penalty: and yung

O&avius made the first trial of his credit with m
Nicol. great uncle in obtaining this favour for Agripa's
m;. brother, who from that time became his firm friend
Augufti. In process of time Cfar grew till more moderate
suer. and complied with the request of several for the lik

purpose, insomuch that some short time before hi
Dio. death he granted an a& of grace. He als gave th

fame instance of his moderation and wisdom afte
the vi&ory of Thapsus, which had redounded
much to his honour after the battle of Pharfalia,
burning all Metellus Scipio's papers, which fell int
his hands.
De B. Afr. Caesar left Utica the i3th of June, having put

end to a war of such importance, and attended wi
so much difficulty, in little more than five months. H
took his route by Sardinia, from whence he sent a pa
of his fleet and of his legions into Spain, under th
command of C. Didius, with orders to observe youn
Pompey's motions, and to put a flop to his progres
As for himself, after having made some flay in th
island, he put to sea again: but in his passage meetin
with foul weather, he was not able to get to Romeun
t:l about the end of July.

SECT. II.
-iat:erii;:g adcrees of the Senate. Cafar having refto
to Sake a m;;ild u/j of the supreme power, Jolemn
e
gages i nfif to it in is speech to the Senate. Ref
tions on C,-far's plan of condut. He celebratess
triumphs; for the iories gained over the Gauls,
Alexandria and Egypt, over Pbarnaces, and over b
Satirical reflefioas on CI'far, of an uncommon lia
rung by the folders during the triumph. Rewards t
ftcwed by Ch'ar on bisfildiers. His bounty to thept
pie. Roman Knights figbt -as Gladiators. Cwfar
gagc: Laberius to play a part in tie Mimi of his

poftic

position. Laberius's smart repartee to Cicero. emple
of Venus Genetrix. Cfar's forum. Amount of the
fums carried by Car in bis triumphs. Regulations
nade by C.efar,for repairing the diminution in the num-
ber of citizens: against luxury: in favour of phyfici-
c::s, and professors of the liberal arts. Tbe Calendar
reformed. Ce/ar's condutl blameable, in what. He
consents to Marcellus's return. Cicero's oration on that
ccafion. Unhappy death of Marcellus. The affair of
Ligarius. Cicero pleads for him. Cesar pardons him.
Cicero's confirained tlifure. He employs it in the com-
poiion of several works. His concern, occasioned by
tie present fate of affairs, abates. His political con-
duEt towards Caesar. He gains the affelion of CeJar's
friends. Eulogium on Cato composed by Cicero. CaeJr's
,lnticatones. Cicero's excessive grief on account of the
death of his daughter fullia.
THE Senate had anticipated Cafar's return by A.R. 706.
T some decrees full of the most servile flattery, Ant. C.
anl by marks of honour, by so much the more excef- Dio4..
live as they proceeded not from the heart, but were XLm.
ditcated by fear; their apprehensions exaggerating
tery thing, the better to counterfeit zeal and affe&ion.
I fall confine myself to some of the most remarkable
;inances.
it was decreed, that there fiould be feasts and re-
,cings for forty days to celebrate the vi&ory gained
iy Calar in Africa; that on the days of triumph his
huriot should be drawn by four white horses, in the
fare manner as the chariots of Jupiter and of the
Sun; and that on those days, betides the customary
Liatrs of his office, he should be preceded by those
to hi: two antecedent Didatorfhips, making together
ifvenry-two Liaors. To these diftinaions, which
were merely honorary, the Senate added titles of more
soid and real power: such as the Dictatorlhip for ten
Yars, and the office of Infpecor of Morals (a title
ubftituted, I know not for what reason, in lieu of that
)i Cnfor) for three years. Nothing now remained

but

A.R. 7. but to raise him above the degree of a mortal: ant
.Ant. C.
46. this was even attempted by decreeing him a fatue o

a triumphal carr, which was to be placed in the Capi
tol opposite to Jupiter's, having the globe of the eartt
under his feet, with this inscription, To CESAR THE
DEMI-GOD.

Cxfar had too much penetration not to perceive
from what principle this extraordinary earneftnei to
confer honours on him, so contrary to the ancient
constitution of government, proceeded. However,
he was pleated with it, and accepted them. But as
he was hitherto only indebted to his power for them;
he was now desirous to merit them. As he had now
attained the height of his withes, and saw his ambi.
tion gratified with Sovereignty, the plan he proposed
to follow was to make a mild and moderate use of a
fortune, which was capable f no further addition
and was willing and desirous that the Romans flould
be happy, provided they were in fubjetion to him.

Full of there thoughts, he declared in his sirs
speech to the Senate after his return to Rome, th
principles of clemency and generosity by which he in
tended to govern; nor did he make any scruple
contract a lolemn engagement, he had no other in
tention than to fulfil. He began by removing the
apprehensions every body was under, and whichwe
but too well grounded, from the cruel example
shewn by all, who till then had been successful
the civil wars. For his part, he protested, thatpowe
and victory were the motives which inclined him
hurmanity. " For," fays he, " from whom ough
, benefits to flow, but from him who has the mean

of bestowing ? Who is less excusable in committin
' faults, than he whose power is unlimited ? W
, ought to how the most prudence and circumfpec
"tion in the use of the gifts of Providence, but
" who has received them in the greatest abundance
" And whom does it molt concern to make a pruden

disposition of the estate he enjoys, but him who
" has the richet poffefions, and consequently ha

·
- molt

, rnoft to lose ? Think not that I shall follow the A R. 706
, steps of Sylla. My intentions are to be your chief, An. c
s not your master; to tranfa& your affairs, not to
tyrannise over you. When I can be useful to you,
I will be your Consul and Ditator; but the intanc
" any one's property is to be invaded, I am no more
" than a private person."
Such were Cafar's sentiments, which were without
doubt laudable and generous, but more suitable to a
lawful Sovereign, than to an Usurper, than which he
was no better. This was a refle&ion, I may venture
to fay, he never made. Nor does he seem sensible of
the essential difference between his situation, and that
of a Prince, whose birth-right, or a free and regular
eletion, intitles him to obedience. He was in hopes
to make amends for the violence with which he had
wrested the sovereign power, by his personal mild-
ness. But he was mistaken, and this mistake was
the cause of his death. This evinces how much a
tnrannical ambition ought to be detested, as it ad-
mits of no amendment; and that after having com-
mitted all kinds of crimes to attain an unjust power, it
is necessary, even in the height of that power, to
continue them, or perish *.
Crfar renewed to the people the fame protestations
of mildness and clemency he had made to the Se-
nate: and the effects being found conformable to his
declaration, the citizens by degrees recovered from
theconfternation and fright they had at first been seized
with. But the hatred the nobility bore the oppressor
of liberty, was an evil to which there was no remedy.
Hitherto Cfar had been totally engaged in the Suet. cxef
wars, and those wars had so closely succeeded each Vell II.
other, that he had not had the least leisure for triumph. SG.
But as he had now some time to dispose of, he em Flor IV

Dio.
' Sylla, whose example fems to contradic this refle&ion, support-
td himself by force as long as he kept the Di&atorfhip; and though,
ater abdicating it, he continued in perfec tranquillity during the
Itbrt remaining part of his life, this was owing to sone extraordinary
rcumLtances, peculiar to him, as I have observed in it; proper place.

8 ployed

A. R. 76. ployed it in the celebration of four triumphs in the
At. C. course of one month, but at proper intervals. His

first triumph was over the Gauls, the next over
Alexandria and Egypt, the third over Pharnaces and
Pontus, and in the fourth and last place over King
Juba.

In these triumphs Cefar shewed all the magnii.
cence his taste naturally led him to, and as much as
could be supported by the riches of the empire, of
which he then had the disposal. He was particularly
careful in varying the ornaments *, whose material.
for each triumph were different. For the.firft he
made use of citron-wood, for the second he employed
tortoise-shell, for the third the acanthus t, and for
the fourth ivory. ....

That over the Gauls was without dispute the most
splendid and superb. There were to be seen the
Rhine, the Rhone, and the captive Ocean representtd
in gold. A multitude of prisoners preceded the cha
riot; and among others, or rather above the others,
was to be distinguished Vercingetorix, that unfortu-
nate chief of confederate Gaul; who had been r
served upwards of fix years to grace his Conquerors
triumph, and was, after the ceremony, flung into
dungeon, and put to death: an unhappy periodto
the life of a man, whose only crime was having atc
tempted to reicue his country's liberty. It would
have done more honour to Cafar, in my opinion,
he had shewn the like generosity to this brave Gaul
he had done to so many vanquilhed Romans, whos
resentment to him was perhaps more violent, and cer
tainly more formidable. But the Gauls were the
looked upon by the Romans on the footing of Bar
rians, and treated as such.

Velleius hs made use of the word Apparatu.,s, which was veryin
t-;igible to the Ronians, but is not bo to us. By tlis word probabl
;s meant the fames of the pictures, and the bales lkich fuppcrted t
images, and other such like pageants.

I Ey this is certainly meant the Acanthus Spinofus, wLich clM
grc--s ;n Libya aid Egypt.

6 Th

The gaiety of the festival was interrupted by an;AR.oi
dent. For during the procefion the axle-tree of ,iC-
etriumphal chariot broke,. and the General had
e to have fallen to the ground. So that it was
it before the chariot could be mended, and Cfar
ended the Capitol by the light of several lustres,
ried by forty' elephants, regularly ranged on the
ight and left. '
-
Dio reports that he ascended the Capitol on his
es. It must then be in conformity to an efta-
lified custom, which Cefar thought could not be
ifpenfed with; not even though he had almost been
ton a par, by the.extravagant honours hewn him,
th the God to whom he paid such low homage.
In the triumph occasioned by the Alexandrian war,
conqueror gave the people a representation of the
er Nile, and of the tower of Pharos on fire. The
aths of Achillas and Pothinus were represented in
different piCtures. And Arfinoe, Cleopatra's sis-
, was there led captive, and afterwards set at li-
bmy.
The triumph over Pharnaces had nothing more re-
arkable than the famous inscription, veni, vidi, vici.
I came, saw, and conquered." This was engraved in
pitals on a tablet, which was carried with great
pomp.
Lastly, in the fourth triumph wherein Caesar cele-
brated his vitory over King Juba, the son of that
Prince, of the fame name with his father, and at that
me a child, underwent the fame rigorous law the
moans imposed on all their prisoners. He appeared
n that occasion' as a captive. But Plutarch has Plut. Caf.
dged his captivity fortunate to him, as it procured
im an excellent education, and gave him an oppor-
tuniy of inftruting himself in the Greek and Latin
iterature. From these helps he made so great an im-
provement in his understanding and knowledge, as to
Dcome a celebrated author; beides this further ad-
Vanage of attaining the most mild and humane de-
portment. He afterwards had part of his paternal

posses-

A . lo. poffelions restored to him, and was made- King,
A. -c Mauritania. But Pliny was of opinion that the rep

tation t of his learning was to him more honourab
than his crown.

It is observable that no Roman is mentioned: i t
title of any of these triumphs. Cafar imitated tl
example of moderation prescribed him by Sylla on
like occasion, and was unwilling to insult the.misfo
Appian. tunes of his fellow-citizens. However, if creditma

.. be given to Appian, Cfar's caution extended o

to the terms, and not to the things themselves. Th
historian relates, that he caused to be carried in h
triumph representations of all the memorable evenj
of the civil war; and portraits of all the Romans
diftincion who had there perished, Pompey only a
cepted: there was to be seen Metellus Scipio fallid
on his own sword, Cato tearing out his bowels, an
so of the reft. If this account may be credited,
am furprized that Appian should be the only wit
who has preserved so detestable a circumstance, an
particularly, that Cicero, who mentions the fpe&to
Cic. Phil. concern, when they saw the city of Marseilles carric
vm. ,s. in triumph, has omitted these other circumftancg

which muff have been infinitely more affecting to tl
Romans. I leave it to the Reader'sjudgment, whl
ther my doubts are well founded. But the authoril
of Appian alone is not sufficient to determine me, i
a fa& of this nature.
Snut. Cxf. Cafar, even at this high point of glory, could
49, 5T. be exempt from the cynical licence of his soldiers.

was a long established custom, as has been obkfe
elsewhere, on these festivals, where joy produced
centioufnefs, for the troops during the procellion
sing some coarse couplets, which sometimes contain
the triumpher's praises, but were oftener so many i
tires on him. Cafar's soldiers pushed this liberty
a very great excess; reflecting with very great feveril
* Sdiorum claritate memorabilior etiam, qu.n regno. PLC
V. .

C

on their General's morals, which gave but too fair iAt.i
an opening. I mufl be dispensed citing their very ..c
words, and ihall only observe, that they revived the
suspicions he had formerly lain under during his ftai
at the court of Nicomedes. Suspicions which gave
Cefar great offence, but which he coutd never get
clear of, notwithtanding his oath to the contrary. Of
L ch importance. is it to reputation to have prudemni
spent one's.youth, whose indiscretions the world seldom
forgets or forgives..
One must not be surprised after this, that not fa- Plin;
tisfied with the rewards Cefar betlowed on them, Xx. s'.
though in themselves abundant, they reproached him
with having subsisted them on herbage, .when they lay
near Dyrrachium. But it is very extraordinary. that
they hould reflec on him for unjustly usurping and
maintaining a tyrannical command. " If you -are Dio,
I" the honest man you pretend," said they all in ge-
neral, " you ought to be punihled: but if you con-
"tinue to be unjust, you may also continue in power."
Which was plainly telling him, that he could not
stape condemnation, if he left the people the un-
rontrouled exertion of their rights, and that he had
oother method of enjoying sovereignty than by op-
iresing his fellow-citizens.
Notwithianding Caesar's soldiers thought the re-Frei,.
ards beltowed on them too moderate, yet they were shem.
'uall very exorbitant. He gave to each veteran cXV. '4
ntythouland sesterces, making about one hundred
sixty pounds of our money he doubled the fum
every Centurion, and gave the quadruple to every
ribune and Horseman: and all this exclufiv of
lands and settlements he bestowed on them. The
clufion is, that if they were not satisfied, it is from
t impossibility of contenting troops, who are fen,
e that their General employs them for his own
terest, and not for the public utility,
The military were not the only persons who fel;
effects of Caxfar's liberality. He gave to each ci-
zn of the lower class, ten bulhels f corn, ten
VoL. IX. U pound

A. R 706popund of oil, and 4oo00 ftcrces in money, (about

t. c. three guineas.) The number of those who recivd

this bounty amounted to one hundred and fifty thou.
sand. Besides these distributions, there was a trea
given to the whole people: twenty-two thousand table
were set out in the streets, and served with proffioa,
To these expences, Cafar further added that of pub.
lic fpectades of all forts, combats of gladiators and
wrestlers, representations of fea-fights in a lake made
on purpose near the city, plays, courses in the Cir
cus, tournaments, and hunting of deer and le
phants.

In the combats of gladiators given by Carao ti
occasion, an indignity was first pra&ised, if I am no
mistaken, which afterwards became frequent und
the Emperors. There were Roman Knights bar
enough to enter the lifts, and, at the hazard of thei
lives, prostitute their honour, and lavish their bleod
for the vanity of pleasing the multitude. There i
also one Q: Calpenus *, who had been a Senator, wh
condescended to the like indignity; but when Fulviu
who was a&ually Senator, offered to engage, Cat
would not susser it.
MIacrob. Among other theatrical pieces, there were foa
at. l. 7. farces played, called by the Greeks and Romaa

Mimi. Laberius, a Roman Knight, happened l
excel in this kind of composition. Cfar, not fai
fled with his furnifling him pieces for his enterta
ment, still further presumed on his complaisance, ar
insisted that he himself should play a part in the
The poet consented, but with regret, as appearsl
his prologue, which Macrobius has preserved, where
he heavily complains, that he, who has quittedl
house as a Roman Knight, should be obliged to ret
to it as a comedian.

* The dignity of Senator was for life, unless they were degPt
by the Censors, on account of some irregularity, or from a volumt
afdication. Without doubt this Calpenus was under one of t
two circwuamances.

Hi

However, he took care to make himself some re- AR. 706.
paration for this violence, by some lines he inserted 46.
in his Mimi, which had an obvious allusion to the
preent posture of affairs. Such as introducing a
person on the tage,'who cried out, " Romans, we
I"areloling our liberty." There was also another
line, which was particularly taken notice of, signify-
ig, " He who * is feared by many, has many to
," fear." The whole audience made the application
of this maxim to Cafar, by turning their eyes upon
in.
The Diaator was offended at this the poet's i-
ctnfe: and this disgust biassed his judgment in award-
ingthe prize to Pub. Syrus, Labierus's competitor.
However, he took care to reward him for having de-
aded himself at his instigation, by presenting him
the spot with a golden ring, as it were to rein-
te him in his knighthood, and by giving him a
rther gratuity of five hundred thousand sesterces. 39oI.
When Laberius had played his part, he went to sen.Cont.
ke his feat among the Roman Knighs ; whoVII- 3
inking it a double dishonour to them, that one ofsat. 1, 3.
tir order should be compelled to appear on the
ge, and after having there played, should return to
Ieat among them, placed themselves in such a
ner that there was no room left for him. Laberius,
order to come at the Knights, was obliged to pass
r the Senators benches. Cicero, as he came by
, feeing him somewhat disconcerted, said to him
I will make you room among us, if I were not al-
ready too much crowded." This he said not only
ridicule Laberius, but at the fame time to refleat
the number of new Senators created by Cafiar,
out any choice, or regard to rules, or decency.
ePoet, who was thoroughly piqued, made Cicero a
r smart answer: " You flrprize me," fays he,
for you were wont to fit on two feats at once."

was a proverbial expression, signifying among
rieefle eft multos tinieat, quem multi timent.

U 2 the

. R. 7c6. the Romans, what we mean by a Trimmer, ooi0t
At.C. who floats between two parties. So that Laberii

refleced on Cicero, because, by keeping plausibly
fair with both Caiar and Pompey, he had beena
staunch friend to neither.

All these entertainments given by Cfa:ar, wert
not merely on account of his triumphs. He ha
other pretences; such as the dedication of a empk
ereced at his charge in honour of Venus Genetrit,
that is to sav, to Venus, worshipped as the head d
Forumlu-the Julian Family; the opening of a new Foru
lium. another monument of his magnificence; laly,
Frein-
t.-n. funeral honours due to the memory of his daught
cxv. 19. who died several vears before, whilst he was in Ga

One cannot help being in some measure aftoniffi
at this immense profusion of all kinds. And I dou
whether the urns carried by Cafar in triumph,
the fruits of his victories, were sufficient, althou
according to Appian, they amounted to sixty-
thousand talents, that is, to upwards of twelve millio
of our monev. And in this rum are not included
thousand eight hundred twenty-two crowns of g
wian eighing together twenty thousand four hundred
i. ia. fourteen Roman pounds.

These Festivals were succeeded by affairs of gre
importance. Cefar, whose genius was universal,
who was no: le1s adapted to make a prudent Leg
tor, than a triumphant Conqueror, reformed di
abuses, and endeavoured to find remedies to fuche
as required the most immediate redress.

The number of citizens was considerably dimini
since the commencement of the civil war. TheDi
tator, who perfectly well knew that the strength of
state consists in the number of its people, madefe
ral regulations towards repairing the loss, and for
Frein- couraging the increase of the Romans. Heprom
cxv. -7. rewards to such married men as should get a nun
31. of children: and sorbad any citizen above twenty,

under forty years of age, to be absent from Italy m
than three years, unless they served in the tr

y the fame order lo Senator's son could travel out of A.- 7*6.
Italy, except in company of tome Magistrate. Lastly, ^ 6.
as a multiplicity of saves occasioned the lower class
of people's being out .of mrployment, who being
thereby reduced to misery, perified without having it.
in their power to marry and leave issue, the Ditator
ordered that at least one third of the Herdsmen ihould
be free-men.
The extravagance of dress and the luxury of dit-
next claimed his attention. He limited the use of
purple and jewels to particular persons, and for cer-
tain days, and revived the sumptuary laws, which he
was particularly careful hould be carried into execu-
tion: insomuch that he appointed Commiffaries to in-
pe&t the markets, to prevent the felling of any prohi-
bited meats, whether fish or flesh. And sometimes on
receiving intelligence of such meats being bought, he
sent Litors and. soldiers into the houses of private
persons, to seize the vicuals as they were serving up
to their tables.
For the honour of letters, I must not omit that
Cafar during the hort respite he enjoyed made it his
application to encourage and reward them; by grant.
ing the freedom of the city, .to all who were willing
to fettle at Rome and pratife physic, and to all profef-
fors of the liberal arts.
It was also at this time he effced the regulation of
the Calendar, which flood in great need of it. I have
more than once had occasion to mention the irregula-
ity of the Roman civil year in the time we are now
reting of. The regulation eftabliihed by Numa,
though far from being perfect, might yet have
served. But the Pontiffs, who by their office were to
keep up this regulation, whether through ignorance,
or through negligence, or perhaps sometimes to pay
heir court to people in power, or to oblige the mo-
nied men, had thrown every thing into confusion: So
that the year, whose events I am now giving an ac-
count of, and which was the last of this confusion and
tliordr, consisted of 445 days. Besides the interca-

U 3 lary

A.R. c6. lary month of 23 days, there was a neceflity of add.-
Ant. C. -

A ir. g 67 supernumerary days of the preceding years

to make the first of January in the ensuing year fll
properly. The care of the Calendar belonged to Ca.
far as High Pontiff; who, to assist him in its refor-
mation, made use of Sofigenes, an Astronomer of
Alexandria. Because the Greeks, through all anti.
q;ity, were the sole professors of Metaphysics, and
the Romans had never had any infight into those
matters but from the learned of that nation. It is
needless to observe, that the Calendar, as regulated
by Csazr, is the fame we now make use of, except that
in order to bring it to its utmost perfection, it has
been expedient to introduce some small alterations,
which were made by the authority and order of Pope
Gregory XIII.

The regulation of the Calendar necessarily made
some confusion in the ancient order of days, both as
to sacred and civil affairs; that is, as well with re-
gard to the festivals, as in relation to the convening
the Senate or people, the audiences of the Tribunes,
and such like. Cafar, who ever paid regard to cuf-
toms established by antiquity, employed a celebrated
Regifier, named Flavius, to adjust as near as possible,
the new plan to the ancient system.
Frein- All these different applications certainly redounded
srnm. to the honour of a person who was the chief of an
cxv. , empire. But Calar took some other steps which be-

traved the leader of a party. The necessity of mak-
ing creatures, or of securing such as he had already
made, compelled him in many things to break through
all rule. Such as increasing the number of offices,
that he might have more places to give away: the
re-infrating, in the free enjoyment of their liberties,
penons, who had either been tigmatifed by the Cen-
icr-, or, what was still worse, condemned by solemn
p- cess. But he was principally refle&ed on for hav-
inz
r ,troduced into the Senate a great number of un-
wv-r:h-- members, who by the meanness of their birth
and o their preceding employments, and even fme

by

by the crimes with which they were branded, difho- A. R- 7or
toured that august assembly. Cafar always mnade it A46.
irule with him to reward such as had been of service
to him. He explained * himself on this head with-
out any reserve, and said, that if robbers and assassins
had been afifting to him in the support of his right,
or in the raising of his fortune, he thought himself
obliged not to be ungrateful to them. Such princi-
ples may be carried very great lengths: and the ub-
version or all laws, decency, and regard to morality,
nuft be the necessary consequence.
Cafar even conferred the dignity of Senator oi
liens, and, as Suetonius expresses it, on Gauls that
were demi-barbarians. This was the subject of a joke,
which that historian has thought it worth his while to
relate. The following advertisements were stuck up
indifferent parts of the city: " t This is to give no-
" tice, that all persons are desired not to Ihew any of
"uthe new Senators the way to the Senate-houfe."
Ctear's facility in admitting all forts of people into
he Senate, increased the Senators to nine hundred,
that is, a third more than their limited number. And a:'ro .
tis gave rife to a joke of Cicero, who being appliedsat'' i.'
to by one of his friends for his interest to get his
on-in-law made a Senator in one of the municipal
towns: ' At Rome, fays our Orator, the thing
would be easy. At Pompeii (which was a little
town in Campania) you will find it more diffi-
cult."
Cleopatra and her brother's voyage to Rome, this
frne year 706, and which I have already mentioned,
wccalioned much talk, and did Caesar great diflervice.
But his clemency to Marcellus redounded greatly
tohis honour. It will not be amiss to recollect what
lhave said elsewhere of this man, who was no less
' Profcifus eft palam, si gratfatorum & ficariorum ope in tuenda
L: ijlnit.,:c ulus eiTt, itaibus quoque fe parern gtiani telaturunl.
. 'T. C !'. n. 71.
+ EoInul Lfturn. Ne quis Senatori novo Curiam monarare velit.
I -t'r. O,;U
1. So.

U 4 eminent

R. 7o6. eminent on account of his birth, .than for the ran
Anc. C he held in the Republic; whose condU& and courag

were equally conspicuous, and whose .foul was inca
pable of meanness or fear. He had during his Con
]lu'hip opposed Ca:far, and openly declared his inten
tion to ruin him. After the battle of Pharfalia, h,
retired, as I have already related, to Mitylenae, when
he seemed resolved to pass quietly the remainder
his days, and to make the study of -books and philo
sophy his whole employment. But the repeated in
Si. ad stances of his brother C. Marcellus, and Cicero's ear

- nest letters hook his resolution, and obliged him atlas

to consent, that application hould be made to the Con
queror, for liberty for.him to return to Rome.

Accordingly one day when the.Senate was aem
bled, and the DiCtator had taken his.feat, Pifo, Cafar'
father-in-law, broke the affair, and first mentiones
Marcellus's return. -Immediately the brother of thi!
iliuftrious exile flung himself at Cafar's feet; and thi
whole Senate at the fame time rising from their feat
seconded his request, and entreated their Chief to re
store them one of their most distinguished and mofl
valuable members. .Cafar at first assumed a severity:
and complained of the resentment and animosity Mar
ceilus had ever shown to him. But when nothingwa,
expected but a denial, and success began to be def
paired of, he added, that whatever reasons he migh
have to be perlonally difTaisfied with the man whos
repeal they sued for, he could not oppose the unani
njous desire of the Senate.

This was matter of great joy to Cicero. Tha
* day seened to him the first happy day for the Re
public fnce the commencement of the civil wars
and in the fit of Enthusiasm which was then upon him
be dclivered thaz excellent oration, so well knowi
n.d bo universally admired; in which, after celebrat
ing all Caesar's exploits, he prefers his clemency an(
ge'-eofity to the glory of all his triumphs.
* It- n:ihi pu!cher hic dies vifus eft, ut fpeciem aliauam videreri
dere qua5 revivifcentis FReipul1ic,. Cc. ad Fam. 1I. 4.

Thi

This speech mft be tfill the more agreeable ct A. Lo-
Cefar, as till then Cicero had kept an obstinate ful- ^At-
len silence, which might have been easily interpreted
i disapprobation of all the then measures. There
were but too good grounds for this suspicion.: and
our Orator, who th6ught it was for his interest to rei
move such an opinion, was not sparing in, the corm
mendations he bestowed on a person, whose secret re-
fentment-he had cause to apprehend. He had laid it
down for a maxim, that a prudent man ought to com-
ply with the times; and in the Oration I am now
Ipeaking of, that principle carried him great lengths
for he therein profefles a personal affe&ion for Cafar,
and a zeal for the preservation of his days, and offers
to'interpofe between him and any attempts that
might be made to his prejudice: a language very dif.
ferent from the real .sentiments of his heart, and ab-
folutely contradicted by the exceflive joy he instanced
at the unhappy death of the oppressor of his country.
However, Marcellus did not reap the benefit of CaE-cc. ad
ar's kindness: for being on his return to Rome, heFa. It
lopt at Athens, and was there assassinated by a wretch'=
who had been a -long time in his service, ard who as-
terwards killed -himself. What could induce him to
this aa, has never been discovered. But Cicero hasic. ad
taken care to clear Cafar from any imputations thatic;.
might be thrown on him.
Cafar did yet another a& of clemency, which has
been the more taken notice of, on account of the part
Cicero took in it. It was in relation to Q Ligarius,
who after the battle of Thapsus had obtained a.par-
don for his life, -but on condition of remaining in
exile. His two brothers, who had taken Cfar's.
party, feeing how easily he had been prevailed on to
lorgive Marcellus, conceived hopes to obtain in like
manner the repeal of their brother's sentence. Ac-
. Omnes tibi, ut pro aliis etiam loquar quod de me ipso fentio, quo-
.am fubelie aliquid putas quod cavendum fit, non modo excubias &
cuodias, fed etam laterum noftrorum oppofitus & corporum poUi,
LCeur. Cic. pro Marc. n. '3'd.

cordingly

A.R 706. cordingly they made application to the Dictator, ant
aL c. were seconded by Cicero, who was their friend. Thh

is the account he fends Ligarius of the audience Cat.
far gave him on this occasion. " In the morning
waited on Cafar, at the inflance of your brothers.
and after * having dispensed with all the trouble and
indignities to which one must be exposed to get at
him, I was at length introduced. Your brother
and other relations flung themselves at his feet: and
I addressed him in a manner suitable to the occasion.
Cafar's answer was mild, but not decisive. But hi
very looks declared, as much as his words, that he
is favourably disposed, and that you may hope for the
bet."
Cic. pro Such was the situation of this affair, when Tubero
Lg. lodged a formal accusation against Ligarius. Nothing

can be more extraordinary than the charge of this ac-
cufation. Tubero accuses .igarius of having carried
arms against C:far: and it was not only his own cafe,
but he was exasperated against Ligarius for no other
reason, than because he pretended he had three years
before prevented his going into Africa, whither the
Senate had deputed him to carry on the war againit
Caesar. So that Ligarius's affair now appeared ina
different light: from being only a business of fuppli-
cation and entreaty, it now became a matter of law;
and from Caesar's closet was now removed to the
Forum, and submitted to the determination of the
bench. Cfar, however, reserved to himself the
right of deciding the affair, but in quality of Judge:
and Cicero, who at first had only appeared on this oc-
cation as olliciting for his friend, now became his
advocate.

Cicero's speech at the trial is indisputably one of
the finest monuments of the skill and infinuatiog ad-
dress of that great Orator. He knew that Cfar
piqued himself on no virtue more than his clemency to
* .um omnem adeundi & conveniendi illius indignitatem & m-
l.ftiam pertuliffem. Cc. ad Fam. VI. x4.

his

senemies. It was there he made his attack. Not A R.zd6-
lat he negle&ed making a proper use of the circum- An...
ances which appeared mofi in Ligarius's favour,

he principally had recourse to Cafar's genero-
y. "Ihave * pleaded, said he to Cefar, many
fes, and some before you. But was never
ard to make use of these expreflions: , Forgive
him, Gentlemen, he has committed a fault: it was
through inadvertency: he will never do so again.*
his is a language to be used to a father. But we
vto the judges: ' He is not guilty, he never so
much as thought on it: the evidence is suborned,
ad the accusation false.' Do you, Cefar, take
pn you to be judge in this affair? Do you en-
ire in what camp he has served ? To this I make
anfer. Nor shall I dwell on several points
ich, perhaps, would have tome weight with a
de: such as that he quitted Rome befores the
rbroke out; that he was left in Africa while the
ce yet fubifted; that he was involved in a
ar when he east expeted it; that even then, so
r from shewing any animosity, his whole heart
d inclinations were for you. This is the usual
nner of addressing a judge. But to you I apply
to a father: ' I am to blame, I have aded
inconsiderately, I rely on your goodness, and en-
treat your forgiveness. Had no body found favour
before you, it would be presumption in me to file
for it; but as there are many instances of your ge-
* Caufas, Cfar, egi multas, & quidem tecum: certc nunquam
modo, tgnolcite judices: erravit: lapsus es : non putavit: si
Unquam pofthac." Ad parentem sic agi folet. Ad jndices, " Non
ifti, non cogitavit: falfi tetles, fictum crimen." Dic te, Celar,
tado Ligarii judicem efle: quibus in prafidiis fuerit, quare. Ta-

Ne hac quidem colligo, quae fortafie valerent etiam apud judi-
. Legatus ante bellum protetus, relictus in pace, bello oppref-
in eo ipso non acerbus, totus animo & tudio tuus. Ad judicem
Ke3: folet. Sed ego ad parentem loquor: " Erravi, temere feci, poe-
"ict: ad clemeiitiam tuam cunfugio: deliai veniam peto: ut ig-
'"focas, oo. Si nemo iniperravit, arroganter: si plurimi, tu idem
,'ropenm, qui fpemdedifti." An perandi Ligario caufa non fit,
I*mr mill apud te lit locus etiam pro altcro dcprecandi ? Cc. pro
; . ;rnerof

' nerofity,

AR.7o6.' nerofity, let not those hopes, to which you yourfe
fl C' 1 have given birth, be frustrated.' And has not Li

garius all the reason in the world to hope for pardon
when I myself, through your indulgence, have thi
liberty of entreating for another ?"

The remarkable stroke of eloquence which follow
what I have just now quoted, is universally knows
and admired, wherein Cicero, with infinite art, put
Cafar in mind of the services done hin by one o
Ligarius's brothers. " You must remember, fays hi
to him, you * who can forget nothing but injuries
you must certainly remember what proof T. Liga
rius gave, when be was Questor, of his attachmcQ
and zeal for your interest." This was attackin
Caesar by his blind fide, if I may use such an expref
sion, in speaking of a generous inclination to pardon
slut. cic. Nor indeed could he resist the soft persuasion whic

flowed from the Orator's lips. He came, if we ma)
believe Plutarch, with a firm resolution to continue
inflexible; because he looked upon Ligarius as an ir:
reconcileable enemy. And therein he was not mif
taken, for this very Ligarius shortly after entered int(
the conspiracy against him. So that it was mere cu
riofity which had drawn Cfar to the bench; as hi
had not heard Cicero plead for several years. But hi
was not his own master. He was several times feel
to change colour: whatever passions the Orator had;
mind to inspire him with, were successively expreffe
in his countenance; and when towards the conclufio
Cicero described the dangers of the battle of Phar
falia, C'ar huddered and trembled from head t
foot, and let fall the minutes of the trial out of hi
hand. In short, Ligarius was pardoned, and ha,
leave to return to Rome.

This event may, if I judge right, be confidere
a. a maiter-piece of eloquence. It is no such difi
cult task to influence a mob, nor does it require anr
extraordinary extent of genius. But by mere dint o
* Q olivifci nihi! oles, nil. injurias. n. 36;

per

prfuafion, to soften and change the pafions of a'A.R.?7
man like Caesar,. is what Cicero alone was capable of.' At c'
The two affairs of Marcellus and Ligarius were the
only public ass which that year employed Cicero's ta-
lents. His other occupations were in compofing-dif-
ferent tracs in philosophy and rhetoric. Since his
return to Rome, he had had no other consolation than
literature; being thoroughly diffatisfied'with whatever
he saw, or heard. Besides the pubic. events, which
touched him sensibly, his own private situation was
none of the most agreeable. By the change of go-
vernment he had loft that eclat, that consideration,
that rank and authority attendant on one of the Chiefs
of the Roman Senate. He had very little influence
with the Regent, who, though he ometimes suffered
himself to be prevailed on by intreaties, was not of'a
temper to allow any one to have much ascendant over
him. Not only Cicero, who had been an enemy of
long standing, but those * who had always been in his
interest, were not of Cefar's council. He was him-
lelf his only Counsellor.
Cicero, in this state of inativity and leisure, which
only served to give a greater scope to his afflitions,
had never been able to t survive, without the affif-
tance of books. He ever took delight in them; but
now they became not only his consolation, but his
physic, and it was to them he owed his health t. It
was at this time he conpofed most of his philofophi-
cal works. Beides the relief an employment of this
kind gave him, he reckoned he was acquitting him-
self as far as he was able of the duties of a citizen.
Since we can no longer serve the Republic in the
Senate and in the Forum, at least let us serve it
* Is utitur confilio, ne fuorum quidem, fed suo. Cc. ad Fam,
I. 9.
t Vivas, inquis, in literis. An quidquam me aliud agere censes ?
aut possem vivere, nifi in litteris viverem. Cc. ad Fam. IX. z6.

A ftudiis antea deledtationem modo petebamus, nunc vero etiam
lalutem. Clc. X. z.
I Si minus in Curia atque in Foro, at in litteris & libris, juvare
Kcmpublicam. Id. ibid,

by

A. R. 706. by compoing such works as ma' conduce to the for
AL. maion of manners, and be inftrutive to our coun
Cic.Acad. trymen." This was a view worthy of Cicero.
L "i. At length bufmefs, time, refle&ion, and necelity,

got the better of his grief. After having bewailed
* his country longer and with deeper concern than
ever fond mother wept the loss of her only child, he
took comfort. He even assumed a kind of gaiety,
and formetimes in his letters makes merry with his
situation.

One of his friends, a man of sense and erudition,
had reproached him for not residing at Rome. " You
are not t then sensible," fays Cicero, in answer to
him, " of the difference between my present and for.
mer situation. I was then at the helm, and direced
the lteerage; at present I can scarce find place in the
hold. Do you imagine that there will be fewer de
crees of the Senate, because I am at Naples ? The Se-
nate's decrees are drawn up in Caesar's closet: andi
my name happens to occur to his memory, it is sub-
fcribed to the decree; and I often hear of a decree s
the Senate, said to be framed on my advice, being
sent into Armenia and Syria, before I know a finle
word of the business it relates to. Do you think I
am joking ? I have received letters of thanks from
very distant Kings, for my having conlented to their
being acknowledged by the Senate Kings, friends and
allies of the Empire, when I not only was ignorant
of the honour conferred on them, but even that such
persons ever existed."
* Patriam eluxi jam & gravius & diutius quim ulla mater unicum
'ilium. Cc. ad Fam. X. 20.

t Quid simile ? ... Sedebamus enim in puppi, & clavum tenebamunr
Nunc autem vix eft in entina locus. An minus multa Senatufcon-
fulta futura putas, si ego fim Neapoli ? . Senatufconfulta fcribuntur
apud amatorem tuumn, familiarem meum. Et quidem, quum in men-
temn enit, ponor d 'cribnr.dum : & ant audio Senatulonfultrm i
Armeniam & Syriam e'e- perlatum, quod in meam fententiam faciumn
effe dicatur, quarn cmn.:;o mentiorem ullam de ea re eife faatam. At-
que hoc nolim me iccari nutes. Nam mii:i fcito jam a regibus ul-.
mis alaras eTfe litteras, quib.us mihi grarias agunt, qund fe mcifen-
tentii -rees aTpellaveri:n: quos non mn do reges appellatos, fed om-
nino na;os nefciebam. Cic. ad t.:m . I,.Ci

Cicero

Cicero judged perfealy right in his behaviosir. He. 1
carefully avoided giving Caesar any offence, whose i',
goodness and moderation he highly extols even in his G. ad
rivate letters. As for Cxfar's principal friend Hir- F6,a '7.
ius, Dolabella, Panfa .Oppius and Balbs, he was v. .
upon extreme good terms with them. Particularly
he two firt, who were men of fenfe.and merit, and
tood fair to be shortly at the head of affairs, studied
eloquence under him: this formed a conftant.famili-
icy and friendship between them, equally advantage-
ous and agreeable to Cicero.
He makes merry on this occasion with his usual
igenuity. " I imitate *," fays he, " Dionysius the
vtrant, who, being drove from Syracuse, opened a
khool at Corinth. So I, to whose determination and
pdgment people were wont to submit their own, now
ihat power is loft, as all depends on the will of one
perlbn, I keep a i'chool of Rhetoric."
His disciples in t eloquence were his maflers in
good cheer, as he has taken care to inform us, and
frequently invited him to supper: on which occasion
he banters very agreeably: '" One : of the advan-
tages, fays he, arising from the lessons I give our
Conquerors, is, that I partake of their voluptuous
tables. Since then I have my share of more peacocks,
than you have eat pigeons. So that those encomiums
ure no longer applicable to me, which you were for-
merly pleated to bestow on me: such as, " How con-
' tented is that man with his diet I what an easy guest
"he is !" I have entirely laid aside my application to
' Intellexi probari tii meum confilium, quod, ut Dionysius tyran-
De, quum Syracufis expulfus effet, Corinthi dicitur ludum aperuiffe,
'c ego, lLblatis judiciis, amiffo regno forenfi, ludum quasi habere
aeptrirp. C. ad Fam. IX 18.
t Hirtium eo & Dolabellai dicendi difcipulos habeo, coenandi
.:,Ircs. Id. bid. 6.
tfxtremnm illud eft, quod tu nefcio an primurn putes: plures jam
Po nses conteci, qulam tu pullos-columbinos. .. Illa mea, qua: tble-
sn aane. lir.dare, o hominem facilem ! o hofpitem non gravem ! abi-
ctnrt. Nam omnem noltram de Republica curam, cogitationem de di-
'tnUaain Senatu fenttntia, commentationem caufarum, abjecimus. In

-suri ncs adverfarii noltri caftra conjecimus. Id. ibid. is, zo.

public

A-. 76. pblic affairs, and my concern for my fellowcil

-t -C. zens. I am no longer anxious to prepare a speech si

the Senate, nor employed in studying causes. I has
deferred that severity of morals I formerly assesec
and am come over to Epicurus's camp, with whom
formerly waged war." This whole passage is so muc
the more witty, as the person to whom Cicero write,
was an Epicurean.
Car's Cicero's friendship and familiarity with the Con
Antica- querors, and his necessary dependance on Cafar, wen
ic. ad not sufficient motives to dissuade him from compofin
At. xii. about this time his famous panegyric on Cato. No

but that he was sensible of the difficulty of such a
undertaking in his present situation. However, hi
went resolutely through it: and if we may guefsa
the work by the kind of plan he has given us of it
one of his letters to Atticus, he not only generallj
extolled his hero's fortitude and constancy, but hecul
to the quick, and celebrated him for having loni
forcfeen the evils the Republic then felt, for his e
deavours to avert them, and for having preferred
death rather than be a living witness of the ensuing
calamities.

Without doubt a work of .this kind could not b
very pleasing to Cafar. However, he lhewed no
marks of his displeasure: but contented himself with
answering it by two traEts, which he intitled (as I have
already said ' "Anticatones," opposing, according to the
exprefflon * of Cremutius Cordus, in Tacitus, plead,
ing to pleading.
Put. C:r. In these two pieces Cafar by no means spared Cato.

But Cicero was therein honourably treated, and com-
pared to Pericles and Theramenes, two of the most
illustrious perfens that ever appeared in the Athe-
nian Republic, great Orators and excellent Statesmen.

Cicero's work still further deserved Caesar's com-
mendations on account of its stile and eloquence; and

M. Ciceronis libro, quo Catonem celo quavit, quid aliud Dic-
tator Cfar, quam refcripta oratione velut apud judices rpondit
T.AC. Ann. Iv. Jo,

I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~a

sBrutus has also composed a panegyric on Cato,A.R.706.
Cfar, upon comparing these two pieces, said in a A,6 c.
kter to one of his friends, that having t several tune
ad over Cicero's treatise, he thought he had ac-
uired a greater richness and more variety of expref.
on: but in reading Brutus's, his own vanity was flat-
red, and he thought he himself was eloquent.
The little I have said of Cicero will, I imagine,
ffice to flew in what manner he employed himself
rom his obtaining his pardon to the time of Cafar's
eath. If in the progress of this work any thing fur-
her should occur worthy of note, I hall take care to
nke a proper use of it. I thall only previously take
otice, that the death of his favourite daughter Tullia,
hich happened the following year, flung him into
edeepeft afflition; which he carried to an excess,
ce becoming so great a genius. Doubtless such Cic ad
fortunes are difficult to be borne, and none but fouls a6. ad'
apable of humanity can be insensible on the like Att.xii.
aions. But a savage melancholy and avoiding all
ciey, but more particularly the ridiculous design of
ifying his daughter and ere&ing a temple to her,
aperhaps be excused in a common man, but are
pardonable in Cicero.
' Lgi epiftolam: multa de meo Catone, quo fpillime legendo fe
t opiofiorem fa&um: Bruti Catone ledo, fe fibi vifum difertum.
.d Art. XIII 46,
VOL.IX, X THE

[ 3t6 ]

THE
ROMAN HISTORY

BOOK THE FORTY-SEVENTH.
C TESAR's war in Spain against Pompey'

children. The conspiracy againif C
far. His death. Anthony's artful co
dua to make an advantage of this deat
A. R. 707, 708.

S E C T. I.
T.se trczubes in Spain prove favourable to young Pom

Cefar comes into Spain. He composes a small pc
during the voyage. Obliges Pompey to raise the iege
U'ia. Besieges and takes Ategua. Reciprocal ru
t;es. Battle of Munda. Leath of Cn. Pompe
Sex:us Pompeius saves himself among the mountains
Cel:iteria. Total redution of Btica. Voltat
death of Scapula. Ca'far's difribution of rewards a
p.n:i-';:er:ts in Spain. 2oung Otavius is fervieabl
!-:eral i his uncle. Cafar. takes all occasions
,ie- hi;; in public. GCaefr's triumph, and the citz
d:fconteit cin that account. Csfar spoilt by the Snat

f..ery. He is dclared Imperator, perpetual DiWt
Cc.. Extraordinary honours conferred on Eim.
p;iil-eg cos ccn?.rlntly wearing a crown of laurel gi

him singular fatisfaZion. GTe reason Cefar appoints
Fabius and Tr6bonius Consuls for the three remaining
months. Caninius consul for seventeen hours. Cicero's
witticisms on that occasion. Cefar arbitrarily difpafes
of all offices and eployments. New Patricians. Ccn-
fular ornaments granted to ten who had pased the Pre-
orian dignity. Cfar appointed Consul fr the fifth
time and Anthony his Collegue. Nomination of other
Mlagifjrates. C<efar prepares to make war againfj the
Parthians. He forms several fcemss, all equally grand
and magnificent.
DURING Caesar's stay at Rome, young Pom- A.R. 7o6.

pey's forces had considerably increaled in Spain, A"t. c
and began to give the Conqueror some uneasiness.
Cn. Pompeius had a great many friends in that Pro-
vince, who had for a long time been attached to his fa-
mily: but perhaps they had never dared declare them-
'elves, had not the ill conduc of the person appointed
by Cefar to command in Ulterior Spain, furniflhed
them with an opportunity. For the better compre-
hending of this, it will not be improper to enter into
ionei preceding tranfaftions.
When Crfar in the first year of the civil war had Hirt. de
subdued Spain, he appointed Q. Cassius Longinus 'lx
Governor of Lusitania and Bactica, who, ihaviny nio. i.
been Qeftor there under Pompey, was well ac- XLU
quainted with the country. Longinus wanted neither
tor enterprize nor courage : but his violeuce, paficn,
injutice and avarice during his Queftorfhip had
mode him so de:tflable, that in a cnfpiracy orined
zgainft hin, he had once been auai!y wounded.
Ihefe reciprocal outrages created reciprocal relent-
.ent.
Now therefore that he was invested with the fu-
r eme command, he endeavoured by ingratiating him-
T^f with the troops to gain their proteEtion againlt the
isaivcs resentment. He made very handsome pre-
nats to the soldiers, and promised them much more,
:iclh to be fre did not fail g:ing their hearts.

X 2But

A R. 706. But the greater progress he made by this means in
A6t. c their esteem, the wider breach he made in discipline.

Besides, he had not a sufficient fund to defray theft
ats of liberality. This put him upon all kinds of
methods to supply that defet: he taxed heavily all
that were contented to be taxed, extorted from others,
and attainted the rich, whose money was the only
means to bring them off: and under the specious
pretence of paying the troops, converted the greatefi
part of the fums he raised to his own use. In a
word, his avarice was unlimited, and he refrained
from no kind of excels, if any thing was to be go
by it.

It is easy to be imagined that such a condua
strengthened and increased the averfior the people hac
for a long time conceived to him: to which the be
haviour of the very persons he employed to put theli
oppreffTons in force, not a little contributed. People
of that fort, who are void of probity and generosity
are incapable of gratitude. Whatever advantage
they made were ascribed to their industry, and where
ever they failed they laid the fault on their Comman
der.

This general averrion soon produced a fecund con
fpiracy against Longinus, which broke outjuft abo
the time that, pursuant to Cefar's orders, he was fe
ting out for Mauritania, in order to prevent Juba
fending any further succours to Pompey, in Greec
and to chastise him for those which he had alread
i;.l:e sent. The conlpirators were all of Italica, a city i
Sr. i';i Betica founded by the elder Scipio, who when he le

e" Spain had there lodged all his ick and woundedfc

diers. Longinus was set upon in open day, andr
ceived several Mwounds. BEit as none of them prove
mortal, he had the fatisf: tion cf taking his reven
on his enemies by the tortures sand cruel deaths he p
them to: not but that there were even then forr
-.:., money atoned or their crime. For as he
.are covetojs than cruel, whatever fatisfaaion

not

might have in indulging his revenge, he was still more A.R. 706.
aifeced by profpe& of gain. Ant. C
The conspirators had engaged in their party those
two legions, which had formerly been under the
command of Varro, Pompey's Lieutenant, and being
afterwards compelled to submit to Cfar, had re-
mained in that province under Longinus. Their ha-
tred to him had revived their former affetion to
Pompey, and notwithstanding they had just received
in Spain an account of their chief's defeat at Pharfa-
lia, they declared publickly for him, chose themselves
a distinct Commander, who gave out that he intended
to recover the province for Pompey; and the soldiers
engraved Pompey's name on their bucklers. Three
legions continued with Longinus, not through any
reard to him, but on account of their attachment to
Caelr. The city of Cordova, in which a great
many Romans were fettled, formed a third party in
this quarrel, and would not abandon Cafar's interest,
though at the fame time they detested Longinus.
The consequences of so violent a commotion might
have proved fatal to the province, and been the means
cf CaLfar's losing it, had not the Questor Marcellus
Elerninus brought about a coalition of parties, and
united all Longinus's enemies under Cfar's name
and authority. Some hort time after Lepidus, who
was Proconsul of Citerior Spain, came into Batica
ait a considerable force. Marcellus readily consented
to his arbitration: and Longinus, after, various inef-
fectual shifts and oppositions, thought proper to sub-
mit, the rather, as at this time Trebonius came from
Rome to take upon him the government of Ulterior
Spain, in quality of Proconsul. Whereupon Longi-
nus determined to quit the country, and having put
to lea, was loft in a storm near the mouth of the river
Iber. By this means Spain recovered its former tran-
quillity.
But as popular fury does not easily subside, this
caimn was but of fliort duration. Besides, the appre-
tiiio0n of Cafar's resentment gave no finall disquiet

X 3 to

A. R. o6.to many who were conscious of having offended. They
A. C, were therefore very well pleased when they heard that

Metellus Scipio had assembled a powerful force in
rio. :. Africa; and immediately sent a deputation to him to

render their service and demand his prote&ion: in
conecquence of which procedure, Pompey's cldeft son
let out for Spain: but being taken ill at the Balearian
islands, the difaffeEed never staid for his arrival, but
found means to persuade the troops and a part of the
province to revolt, and were more than a match for
Trebonius, whose force was not sufficient to oppose
them. T. Scapula and Q. Aponius, two Roman
Knights, took upon them the command of the legions
till such time as young Pompey could come and put
himself at their head.

He had no sooner recovered his health than he
joined them: his name, his affability (which, not-
withstanding his natural austerity, he at that time a.
fumed) his success at first setting out, and a proper
application of some fums of money, which had been
raised by a military contribution on ome of the op-
pcfite party; all there several circumstances contri-
buted to the establishment of his party, and he soon
found himfeli master of almost all Spain. In order to
augment his troops, he did not hefitate-to enlist as
many fla-es as would voluntarily enter, whom he im-
mediately presented with their freedom : by this means
he precen:ly aembled an army confifling of thirteen
legions. After Metellus Scipio's defeat, Cn. Pom-
peius found means to colle&t ome of his forces;
which with the fleet brought him by his brother Sex-
tus, in conjunction with Labienus and Varus, soon
put him in a condition to oppose Cxfar's Lieutenants,
either by land or ea. Neither could Didius, whom
1 have already mentioned to have been detached by
Casar with a part of his fleer, nor Q Fabius and Q,
Padius, who commanded his legions, attempt any
thing towards the reduction of an enemy who was
now become too powerful for them: They, and as
many. of the inhabitants as yet preserved their allegi-

giance

ance to Cxfar, joined in their application to that Ge- A R. 706
neral to come to their assistance; representing to him ,
,
that the danger was now become worthy his attention,
and that his presence was absolutely necessary to save
the province.
Cafar therefore set out from Rome about the end Aua. de
of the year of his third Dicatorfhip.i I can find no- B. Hifp.
where any account of what number bf-troops he took Appian.
with him into Spain. However, he did not march Dio. .
with them; but according to his usual custom pre- XLIV.

F Suet. Czf.
ceded them, and with so much dispatch, that in 6.
twenty-feven days he,,ame from Rome to Obuko in
Batica near Cordova. And as during the voyage he
found himself disengaged, in order to give himself
'ome employment, he composed in the passage a little
poem containing a description of his voyage. That
active, restless genius would have destroyed itself, if
at the intervals of state affairs, it had not had recourse
to letters/ It was during these short intervals that he
wrote all his works which are now extant, and many
others that have been loft.
C-far's friends were no less furprized at his dif-
ptch, than his enemies; especially as they all on a
ludden saw him in the midst of them, when they ima-
gined he could not possibly be near them. Neverthe-
less as it was known in Spain that he intended shortly
to set out, Pompey had taken the precaution to shut
himself up in Baetica, and had given up the reft of
Spain, being convinced that his whole united force
world be but barely sufficient to defend him against
an adversary of such importance. All Batica was un-
der Pompey's obedience, the city of Ulia excepted.
Pompey undertook to reduce it by force, and was ac-
tually engaged in besieging it, at the time Cafar came
into the country.
Though the high idea Pompey's son had of the
Conqueror of his father made him judge it neceffarv
to take some precautions, yet it was far from intimi-
dating him. He did not think there could be such a

X 4 differ-

A R. o6. difference between man and man, as that one migh
An6 . not hope for success as well as another; so that, not

withifanding Cfar's arrival, he pushed on the sieg
with courage and resolutions; But the success did no
answer his expectations: and he was soon made fen
fible of his enemy's superiority. Cafar found mean
to introduce ome succours intdothe town, and at the
fame time advanced towards Cordova, as if.he intended
to attack that capital of all the province; Sex. Porn
peius, who commanded there, was underterrible ap
prehensions, and applied to his brother for succours,
who now found himself obliged to raise the siege o
Ulia.

Cafar's scheme was to determine the affair by a de.
cifive battle. Accordingly he marched up to the
enemy, as they were posted under the walls of Cor.
dova, and being obstructed in his route by the rivei
Batis or Guadalquivir, as there was no poffibilityot
fording it, he found means to pass it, by the help o
an extempore bridge, composed of baskets filled with
tlones which he let down into the water, and coered
over in the most expeditious manner he could. As
soon as he came in fight of young Pompey, he used
all his endeavours to draw him to a general engage.
ment: but the latter declined it, and contented him-
self with flight skirmishes, which were of nogrea!
service to either fide. Whereupon Cafar, who was
not used to trifle away his time at that rate, went and
laid siege to Ategua, the strongest fortress which Pom.
pey then had.

C. JULIUS CAESAR IV.
A. R. --. I shall not be very particular as to the operations of
Ant. c. this siege, which are ill enough described by the au.

' rthor of the Memoirs of the Spanish War, whose stile is

nut only fits and unpleasant, but so barbarous, that
he appears no better than a colletor of Gazettes.
1fl11 only observe, that the enterprize w.s attended

with

with great difficulty, from the strength of the place, A.R. ,t.
the rigour of the season (for it was then the depth of AntC
winter) and the neighbourhood of a powerful army,
ready tofling in succours on every occasion,; Caesar
surmounted all these obstacles, and the city ffirren-
dered the 19th of February.
He had been sooner master of the place, had he
been disposed to comply with the terms offered him
by the inhabitants, which were to let the garrison
march out unmolested. But he answered them haugh-
tily, " that * Cefar was used to prescribe conditions,
t not to receive them." This answer, which cut the
garrison off of all hopes, determined them to make a
more obstinate resistance. But at length all the forti-
fications of the city being destroyed, and the garrison
and inhabitants disagreeing, the latter opened theit
gates upon no other condition than the security of their
lives. As for the garrison, we have no account in
what manner it was treated.
It is to be supposed that they were treated with fe-
verity enough, if we may judge by the cruelty with
which the two parties carried on the war. The com-
mander of the garrison of Ategua had cansed a great
number of the inhabitants, whom he fufpe&ed to fa-
vour Czfar, to have-their throats cut, and be flung
over the city walls. After the taking of Ategua, fe-
venty-four citizehs of an adjacent town were beheaded
by Pompey's order for the like crime. And Caesar's
soldiers, for their parts, gave no quarter to any of
the contrary party, who had the misfortune to fall into
their hands. Such are the horrid effcds of civil wars,
which are always carried on with greater cruelty than
any other.
Cvfar, since his coming into Btica, had raised
o:e fge, and taken a place of considerable strength
in te very face of the enermy. These were no incon-
idtrable advantages: but yet there wanted a general

Se conditiones dare, non accipere, confuevife, De B. Hifp. n. 14.

engage-

4.. -.oT. engagement, as the only means to put an end to th
ht. c. war. Wherefore, as soon as he was master of Ategua,

he ituck close to young Pompey; who, to encourage
his party, gave out that Cafar was afraid to exp0fe
himself in an open country, at the fame time that he
himself took care to keep on the eminencies to prevent
his being attacked. He only detached ome parties
of cavalry, which drew on ome small engagements
in which he sometimes gained success, but as often
was worsted. At length the two armies, by frequently
ilifting their ground in order to harrafs each other
cane near Munda, a place become famous in his.
tcry by young Pompey's ruin, and for terminating
Cafar's viEtories.

On the 2zth of March, Cfar, who was preparing
to decamp, having received advice by his scouts that
the enemy had been drawn up in order of battle ever
since midnight, resolved to attack them, and make
use of an opportunity he had long wiThed for. Pom.
pey's design was to come to action, apprehending
that by continually retiring, he might fling a slur on
his arms, and be despised and forsaken by his partisans.
But he had cholen an advantageous post, near the
city of Munda, which secured his retreat, and on an
eminence, defended on one fide by an almost imprac.
ticable morass. However, these difficulties were no
impediment to Cafar, who at first drew up his troops
in the plain, leaving a sufficient space, in cafe the
enemy had a mind to come down and attack him:
but perceiving that they did not design to quit their
post, he marched up to them, giving the word Venus
for the parole of the day, a name he frequently made
choice of on the like occasions. The parole Pompey
gave out was Pietas, alluding to his intention of
avenging that day his father's death.

This city fiil retains its name, except that it is now wrote Mon-
da. It is ituate in the kingdom of Granada, not far from halai
near -e litle river Guadalmedina.

The

The battle was obstinate. Pompey had not only A R.
te advantage of ground, but the superiority in num- 45
bers, having thirteen legions to Cafar's eight. And
the persons who composed these legions were so cir-
cumftanced, as to be in a manner under a necefity of
ighting desperately; being either soldiers who had
bfore lerved under Afranius and Varro, and had paid
no regard to the pardon Caesar had granted them,
consequently had no hopes of further favour; or saves
let at liberty, who, if they should happen to be taken
prisoners, had nothing to expec but an ignominious
punilhment, or at leat a rigorous servitude. As for
Cafar's troops, their former glory, the presence and
c.teem of their ever fortunate General, a resentment
of having no respite in engaging a party, which tho'
ilhad been so often defeated, frill continued formi-
lible; all these refle&ions were strong incentives to
heir behaving gallantly. However, there were some,
dubtlefs, among the new levies, whose hearts were not
exempt from fear, when the moment approached
which wai to decide their fate. Nor is it to be won- Flor. IV.
dered at, if what Florus fays is true, that Cafar him- '
fdf appeared more than ordinary serious. Perhaps he
might not be thoroughly recovered from his diftem-
pr, of which he had had several severe fits ince he
came into Spain.
However, it is certain that at first the battle went
2gainft him, and that victory seemed to declare for
his enemies. Not only his new raised troops, but his
eterans, after fourteen years constant success, gave
round: and if they did not absolutely run away, it
as more owing to their sense of shame, than to their
ourage.
This ill success made Cafar almost desperate: he
allied his soldiers with what expedition he could,
nd endeavoured to animate them Sometimes by en-
eaties, ometimes by reproaches. " What," fays Ptt. cf.
ie to them, " are you going to give up your Gene-
"ral, who is grown grey under your laurels, to a
1 parcel of boys ?" Doubtless the danger muf be

very

A. R 77. very great, and there were very little hopes of reco.
Ant c vering the day, if we may believe on the testimony

of Suetonius and Florus, that Caesar was in doubt
whether he should not kill himself. He certainly ex.
Suet. cf. posed himself very much: and thinking that info
Flor. Ir. great an exigence, he could not do too much, he

- uitted his horse, took a buckler, and advanced withj

ten foot of the enemy. His example, and the appa.
rent hazard he run, revived his soldiers courage.
The tenth legion, that corps so often celebrated for
its heroism, and which, though it was greatly reduced
in number, was worth a whole army, particularly
distinguished itself. Yet the battle, which had lased
almost the whole day, ill continued doubtful, until
Labienus by an injudicious, or at leat unfortunate
motion, decided the affair.

Carfar had among his auxiliaries some light troops
come from Mauritania, and commanded by Bogud,
King of part of that country. That Prince, during
the heat of the acion, took it into his head to go and
attack the enemies camp, which he imagined to find
defenceless. Labienus perceiving his motion, de-
tached five cohorts, which immediately quitted the
field of battle in order to intercept the Moors and to
save the camp. Cefar either thought they were run-
ning av.v- -, or made believe so. He cried aloud that
the enemy was making off: and this false opinion
spreading itifcl instantly among the two armies in-
crealed the courage of the one, in proportion as i
terrified the other: C.efar's troops, efpeciallythetenth
legion, tcok this opportunity to press the enemies
whose ranks began to be in ibme confusion. In
snort time thole who at firit were only a little difor
dered, were entirely broke, and did not perceiv
their error until it was without remedy.

Never was victory more compleat. Thirty thou
sand were killed on Pompey's fide, amongst whom
were Labienus and Varus, to whom Cefar paid th
cuftorrarv funeral honours, and three thousand Ro
man tKni.hts. All the legionary eagles were taken,

as

slikewife the major part of the colours, ant} the A.R. 7o.

Ant. C.
fces which were carried before the General; and 4A.
fenteen principal officers were made prisoners. The
onqueror loft a thousand of his bravest soldiers,
d had five hundred wounded. This battle, which
ofed the civil war, was fought the fame day, that
or years before Pompey the Great set out from
Bundufium to go into Greece. It was plain that the
combat was obstinate; and Cefar has himself ac-
knowledged how great risk he run, by declaring that
on all other occasions he had fought for vi&ory, but
atMunda for his own personal safety.
The remains of the defeated party saved themselves,
mrne in their camp, and others in the city of Munda.
The camp was soon forced: but it was no such easy
matter to take the city, which was in a condition to
maintain a siege. The conquerors that very day in-
vested it: But as they had not time to open the
trenches in form, they formed a kind of line of cir-
cumvallation round the town of the carcasses of the
enemy, which they heaped up, and aftened to one
another by transfixing them with their swords and
pikes: they also took care to turn the faces towards
thebefieged, in order to inspire them with terror, at
the fame time that they in this manner ereced barba-
rous trophies of their victory. This siege lasted a
month, and concluded with tie death of almost the
thole garrison.
The unhappy Chief of this routed army did not
long survive his defeat. He tried all methods to save
hirnfelf and a few troops and ships he had got toge-
ther, but was constantly unfortunate. He was at-
tacked and beaten by a party of the enemy, which had
been detached in pursuit of him; and having the mis-
fortune to be wounded in the shoulder and left leg,
and to dislocate his heel, he could neither mount on
horseback, nor bear the motion of a litter, but was
obliged to conceal himself in an obscure cavern. How-
ever, he was soon discovered by the enemy, who cut
o his head, and brought it to Coefar on the i th of

April.

A.J R 77. April. As it was of consequence that his death fhoul
At. Cbe made as public as possible, his head was for sorn

time exposed to public view, by the Conqueror's or
der, and afterwards interred.

Sextus Pompeius, the only remaining hopes of hi
family, for the present escaped the impending danger
He happened to be at Cordova during the battle o
Munda, and was no sooner informed of its ill success
than he quitted the country, and went and concealec
himself in the mountains of Celtiberia; where thougt
he found means to escape all enquiry, yet he wa
drove to the necessity of plundering the country si
his subsistence. However, we hall find that after
Cafar's death he resumed his rank, and made no in.
considerable figure. By the victory of Munda all
Batica hortly fell into Cfar's hands; and thougb
the remains of Pompey's'party made several attempts,
and endeavoured to form an opposition at Cordova
SeiL Hifpalis, and several other places, yet they were nq

more than the last struggles of a dying party. They
were presently reduced to the necessity of submitting
to the Conqueror's jurifdi&ion: and Cafar had n0
thing further to do than regulate the affairs of thd
province, and make a distribution of rewards and pu!
nifhments.

Scapula, who had principally contributed to the
insurrection of the province, hoped by a voluntary
death to acquire immortal reputation. For which
purpose he pursued the method of those false Braves,
who thought by an affecation of courage to gain ex-
traordinary commendations, when in reality theyonly
thereby concealed their despair and want of resolution.
He had retired from the field of battle to Cordova.
There he assembled all his houfhold, ordered a fu-
neral pile to be erected, and a magnificent upper to
be got ready; he likewise gave directions that the
hall and beds where they were to eat hould be orna-
mented, and the buffet set out in all its lustre: and
after having distributed his money and plate among
his family, he fat down early to supper, as to an en-

tertainmenti

tertainment; nor did he forget the perfumes, which, A.kaR ,o
every one knows, the Romais were very fond of. At 7,i
the conclusion of the festival, having given in charge
to one of his freed-men to set fire to the pile, he or-
dered one of his slaves to put him to death, which was
accordingly executed,
Caesar, having convened at Hifpalis the deputies
bs the several towns and diftri&s which had favoured
the younger Pompey's party, made them, in a long
harangue on that occasion, all the reproaches which
a superiority of fortune impowers viaors to throw on
luch as they have in their power. But he took no
other vengeance than by pecuniary fines, and a heavy
imposition of taxes, in the fame manner as he had
done in Africa. As his natural clemency induced
him to avoid an effusion of blood, so his innate avidity,
Supported by the necessity of the times, prompted him
to the greatest extortions. He plundered the very
temples, particularly that of Hercules at Cadiz, whole
treasures, and all the rich oblations, he seized for his
own use. Dio relates that he made even those, whom
he rewarded, pay for the freedom of Rome, and other
privileges and favours which they found means to ob-
tain. But as he punished the guilty no otherwise than
in their purse, I can hardly persuade myself that he
fold his favours to those, whose conduet he had rea-.
Ion to approve.
His nephew the young O&avius, who then com- NicD'
menced his nineteenth year, and for whom he had a i,ltit.
very great regard, was remarkably serviceable on this -Aug
occasion to several, who either implored the Diata-
tor's clemency, or follicited any honours or rewards.
The Saguntines were particularly obliged to him for
his interceflion, and protection; who, though they
were charged with very heavy accusations, found
means, through his interest, to obtain their pardon
from Cafar.
In this manner this young man began to make
himself known, and to answer his uncle's expectaticns.
For as Cafar had no children, and the promising ge-

nius
8

A.R 707. nius of his nephew, who discovered on all occasions a
Ant. C.
An"C. great superiority of talents, had made him take the

resolution of adopting him, he for some time had
made it his endeavours to improve him, and to intro-
duce him to the world whenever opportunity offered.
For this purpose he had invested him with the Priest.
hood, vacant by the death of L. Domitius, fain at
the battle of Pharfalia. And in his triumph, he
Suet.Aug. made him march on horseback by his fide, adorned
C. 8- with spoils and other marks of honours, though his

age and extraordinary delicacy of conffitution had not
permitted him to serve. In the festivals which fuc.
ceeded his triumphs, he appointed him Supervisor
and Director of the public flews, which were exhi.
bited in the Grecian taste and language. Lafly,
when he set out for the Spaniih war, his design was
to have taken him with him. But a violent fit of
ficknels confined Octavius for a long time at Rome,
so that he was not able to join his uncle till after the
battle of Munda. It was in the amiable light I have
just described, that he appeared in Spain; and it had
been happy for him, if he had always preserved the
fame mild sentiments of humanity which he sirs set
cut with.

Cefar, after having fettled affairs in Spain, returned
to Rome in the month of October, having composed,
in the midst of the tumult of arms and the no less em-
barraffing concerns of the cabinet, and of frequent
audiences, his two Anticatones, which I have before
mentioned.
Piut. On his return to Rome he gave orders for his tri-
cf. umph; whereat every body was much offended.

*Without doubt by triumphing, not because he had
subdued some barbarous nations or foreign Princes,
but for having ruined without resource the most il-
luftrious family in Rome, he manifefily insulted the
misfortunes of his country: It was exulting at an
eve.rt, which, as Plutarch observes, could notbe ju-
t:ie, before Gods or men, but through the neceflity
of irs bein fol. However, Cafar was desirous, or a

6 leall

leaA consented, that this scene, which so tenderly as- A.R; 70o;
feed his fellow.citizenst lhould be twice repeated, Ant..
by the triumphs he decreed Q Fabius and Q Pedius, Dio.
his Lieutenantg General in Spain. And herein he
committed another irregularity, because by law a ti-
umph could be only allowed to those who had the
chief command, and not to a person who had b'en
delegated by ahother.
He could not' but perceive the general diffatisfak-
tion his procedure had occasioned: for notwithftand-
ing the maghificce of his triumph, and f the
feasts which succeeded it, the people discovered not
the least emotion of joy: and they atually made a
jet of the fordid thriftiness with which his Lieutenants
triumphs were conducted. For the several reprefen-
tations of the captive cities being on that occafio in
wood, whereas those which had been exhibited in Ca-
far's triumph were either of silver or ivory, it'was
given out that the cities of these latter triumphs were
only the cafes of thole exhibited in Caesar's.
However, herein the Senate was more blameable Plut. Dio,
than Cafar, and it was their flatteries which spoilt
him. He himself had been so far from assuming any
merit from the vidory of Munda, that he had even
neglected fending any advice of it to Rome. But it
was no sooner known there, by public report, and by
private letters, than the Senate, instead of imitating
the Conqueror's prudent moderation, initanced the
most excessive and unlimited joy, and ordered public
ihankfgivings to be continued for fifty days. The ma-
jority thereby were in hopes to pay their court to
him: but in many, it was only a mere refined hatred;
their design being, on this and many other occasions,
wherein they decreed him the most excessive honours,
io excite people's envy, to render him odious, and
to pave the way to his deftrution. Caesar, who
was extremely fond of pomp, perceived not their
drift, but gave entirely into their scheme; so readily
do the nmoft exalted genius's become the dupes of
their favorite ruling paflion. He scrupled not to ce-
VOL. IX. Y lebrate

A.wl . lcbrate an odious triumph, which bad no sori
A C war for its pretence: and, some few. inftancc .-

cepted, there were no honours so eccflive, nor no
flattery so absurd, which he did not aftrwards readily
accept.

Czefars fortune now was at its highest pitch. The
contrary party was entirely destroycd, not having any
leader or troops remaining throughout the whole -
pire. Cefar, being now unoppofed, only wiated
some titles which might perpetuate and seem to a
thorife the power he had usurped: and which,.as he
Suet.czf.'was absolute, were soon conferred on him. He as
lu7t.Dio. accordingly declared IMPERATOR, or Emperor, ?-
Appian. tar Pairie, Consul for ten years, and perpetual Dic-

tator.

Plutarch observes that by this last title, he wa in.
vested with Monarchy; they having perpetua~ th
high Dignity, which had ever carried with it an
limited authority. The appellation of Pater pati
was only a title of honour: But that of * ·Ipat
in the manner it was granted him, conferred on h
the chief command of all the forces of the Rcpu
As for the decennial Consulship, it being of nor
to him by his having been declared perpetual Di
and Emperor, he declined it.

His person, in like manner with that of the Tri
buncs, was declared sacred and inviolable: but ti
precaution was not able to screen him from the rfent
ment his unjust usurpation inspired people with. A
to do him further honour, they altered the name
the month in which he was born; which being

* This word has various acceptations. Besides the common fig
fication of General, it became a title of honour for any comman
who had pined a single vicory. Of this we have cited, in the c
T .rn n. of this hitory, several instances; and down to the time of Tibri

we find this title bestowed on Ibme private persons, in this
4 sease. But this epithet of Imperator was given to Csar, in anen

new manner, ignifying hereditary Generalifiimo of all the form
the Republic, and it descended to Augustus and all his fuacelo
which we translate Emperor, and used in this sense, it preceded
other titles: " Imperator C. Julius Caesar, Consul quartum, Dlh
" perpetuus, Pater patris."

gitr

frh from the month of March, had always, till then, A. R. 7l.
been called, for that reason, Quintilis; but was now Ant-c.
changed to ulius; from whence is derived our pre-
sent July.
Imagination itself was exhausted to invent new and
uncommon honours for him: and this may be ftiled
the epocha of that spirit of flattery which was carried
to so great a height under the succeeding Emperors,
and increased in proportion as the object was base
and detestable. I {hall not particularise all the in-
cnfe of this kind, which was offered up to Cxefar
he privilege of wearing the triumphal robe on all
festival days, a diftin& feat in all public shews, rank,
pre-eminence, statues, lastly divine honours though
I thall have occasion to speak more at large as to this
aft article under the ensuing year. But I must not
ere omit, that, among his various prerogatives,
there was no one gave him more fatisfation, than
the permiflion granted him, of constantly wearing a
aown of laurel. And the motive for this fatisfa&ion
i very remarkable, and very proper to instance, that
he greatest men are not exempt from weaknelhes n
even such as expose them to the strongest ridicule.
It happened that the fore-part of his head was
bald, and he had highly resented some jokes which
hd been made on that occasion: he therefore was
tremely pleased, that by means of the laurel-crown,
could conceal this defec, which, though trifling in
ls, gave him strange uneasiness. For notwith-
iding he was then fifty years old, he piqued him-
If on his person; and as he pretended to be a de-
ndant from Venus, he endeavoured to insinuate,
at he inherited from that Goddess, an extraordinary
vantage, in person and figure. He certainly had
good complexion, a round * face, lively black eyes,
was tall and well-fhaped: all which natural ad-
'I have elsewhere iaid, on the authority of Plutarch, that C.far
thin. But the expreftion of the Greek hifiorian is confined to
ihape and body, r i ;t, iryl; : which is not incompatible with the
d face attributed to him by Suetonius, " ore paulo pleniore."

Y z vantages

A. R.-7. vantages he studied to improve by the leganceo
An. * his dres. Who could have imagined, that Cafar,

who had conquered Gaul, and defeated Pompy,
and the whole Republican party, hould almno de.
serve to be ranked among the Petits-maitres?
Suet. 70. Cafar, till his triumph, had been oIle Consul. But
&So.° as soon as he had triumphed, he abdicated the Con.

fulflip, convened the States, which he had a right to
do as Ditator, and procured Q Fabius Maximu
and C. Trebonius to be nominated Consuls for the
three remaining months of the year. This was the
second instance of his creating these titular Coaful
whole authority was extremely circumscribed. Th
people could not help resenting this degradatio
of the principal office of the Republic, and had
thorough contempt for such imaginary Magirates
Accordingly one day, as Q Fabius was coming int
the theatre, and his Litor according to custom re
quired the people to make way for him, they a i
general cried out, that they did not acknowledgeS
bius for Consul. But Caesar, who no longer regarde
rule, shortly afterwards, notwithstanding the people'
discontent, broke through the prescribed regulations
in a more extraordinary and provoking manner. So
this fame Fabius happening to die suddenly the la
day of December, the Dictator substituted inh
place C. Caninius Rebilus, who entered into an o
fice at seven o'clock in the morning, which he w
to resign at night.
Cic. ad Cicero took several occasions to make merry wi
S'I *.j this extraordinary Consulship. He said that nbod

had eat any dinner, all the while Caninius was Con
ful: he commended his vigilance, in that he had no
once closcd his eyes during his whole confullhip:
Macrcb. called him a metaphysical Consul, as he escaped th
Sat. 1!. ;. senses. When he received the compliments on hi
Ph:t. C;f. nomination, " Let's make haste, fays Cicero, left t

" term of his office be expired, before we fee him.'
Lastly, he observed, that it would be one day aked
under what Conluls Caninius had been Consul. Thi

Ia

ihftjoke had at that time its force. But what ap- A.R. 707
peared then so extraordinary to Cicero, becaie as- Ant.C.
rwards customary. Under Auguatus and his fuc-
ceffors, Consuls were-no longer created for a whole
year: they were only nominated for some months,
and the years were diftingailhed by the names of
those, who were Consuls on the first of January. suet. &
In whatever regarded employments, or offices,io.
Czfar only consulted his own pleasure, his interest,
or the neceflity of recompenfing his creatures. So
that during the whole time he was in Spain, there
were neither Praetors, Ediles, nor Questors. The
funions of the several offices were discharged by
Prefecs, who aed under the diretion of Lepidus,
General of the horse. When Cafar returned to Rome,
he created fourteen Praetors, and forty Questors, an
eaorbitant and unprecedented number.
In the disposal of the governments of provinces he
|as intirely guided by his own inclinations; without
fufiering them to be drawn for, as had been usual.
He reje&ted such as did not suit his purpose, and gave
ifum of money to a certain Bafilus, a Pretor, in lieu
of a government which he had denied him. Bafilus
us so displeased with, and so highly resented this
treatment, that he starved himself in a fit of despair.
However, Cear did not totally deprive the people Suet. Caf.
of their right in eletions. He reserved to himself'
the nomination of the Consuls and of one moiety of
theother magistrates, the other half was left to the
choice of the people. The common form in elec-
tions was still kept up, even for those whom Caesar
Ippointed; with this difference, that billets were di-
fributed among the Tribunes, importing: " I Cafar
Difator, have given such an office to such a one :"
ornmore modestly, " I recommend such and such per-
irs to you, that by your vote and interest, they
ray attain those honours they so jutly deserve."
He also created new Patricians. The number ofDio.
e antient Patrician families was considerably di-
ainled by the various accidents to which human na-

Y 3 ture

A.oR- 7. ture is subjec, and particularly by the civil wan.
Ant. C. The Di&ator resolved to replace such as were exti,

by creating new ones: a thing which had never been
pra&ised since the first eflablilhment of the Common.
wealth. Nobility was to be acquired by means of
great offices: but the Patriciat was hereditary, and
only in such senatorial families as had been made
choice of by Romulus, or some of the succeeding
Kings, or laffly by Brutus, the first Consul, ad
Nic. De- founder of their liberty. Of the new Patricians
mnc. in- created by Cefar, we know none particularly but
Dio. i. young Oc:avius and Cicero. Dio indeed adds all who
XLVI. had attained the Consular dignity, or bore any ofice:

which I suppose must be underitood, any Curule of-
fice.

To conclude as much as relates to the prefeat
year, I muff observe, that Cfar, not being ableto
gratify the pretensions of all who claimed the Con.
fulfhip by virtue of their services, yet being desirous
to give them some fatisfafion, he granted Consular
ornaments to ten, who had passed the Pratorian dig-
Suet. Cf. nity. This new method of increasing the rewards
n. 76. without any trouble or expence, was approved of,

and frequently put in practice by the succeeding Em-
perors.
Cic. Pil. Though Cafar had refused to accept the offer
UL made him of a decennial Confullhip, yet he did not

absolutely decline that office: on the contrary, hego
himself appointed Consul for the ensuing year, and
took Mark Anthony for his Collegue; who notwh-
standing the falling out he had had with the Di&ato
in relation to the fuccelffion to Pompey's effects,
which account he did not follow him, either to t
African or Spanish war, had for some months bee
retaken into favour. Dolabella, who had nev
quitted Cafar, during the whole course of his war
also laid claim to the Consulship. Cafar fatisfi
him, by procuring him to be appointed Confitl le
and he was to enter into his office as soon as Cf
had abdicated it; his design being to keep thato

sic

ce only a few months, till the time of his departure R.t 707.
to make war against the Parthians: of this projet& 5t
we Ihall fbortly have occasion to speak more fully.
Lepidus had been his General of the horse, in his
third and fourth Ditatorfhip: and it was continued
to him in the fifth, which dignity Cafar jointly held
with his fifth Confullhip: nor had young Oftavius Plin. vil.
intcreft enough to carry it from that old friend. This, 45*
though a considerable mortification to O&avius, was
faome measure alleviated by the aurances given
him that his pretensions were only deferred, not re-
jed. For as Lepidus was invested with the go-
enments of Narbonefe Gaul and Citerior Spain, and
s Shortly to et out to reside there, Otavius had rin.
thtpromnife of being in a few months appointed Ge- I. ,9
eral of the horse, and in that quality to accompany so.
his uncle in his expedition against the Parthians. These
neafures so taken, and which depended on the conti-
uance of Cefar's life, were defeated by his unhappy
death, which happened the following year, while he
was yet Consul.
There was then no cause to fufpeE such an acci-
dent, but it was imagined the Diaator would be a
long while absent on account of the Parthian war.
For which reason it was given out that there was to
a nomination of the Magitrates for several fuc-
eding years: though there were no grounds for
such a report, except with regard to the Consuls.
Sixteen Praetors were nominated for the ensuing
ar: and Cefar, besides the two Curule and the two
ebeian Ediles, which were created every year, in-
fituted two more, which he ftiled Cereates, who were
tohave the infpeaion of the fruits of Ceres, such as
an and all kinds of grain.

Y 4 C. Juval

AR IL 7. C. JLIUS CESAR V. ';

4A . M. ANTONIUS.
Plut. Cafar was scarcely clear of the civii wars, wl
zf. began to grow tired of inaaiion. 4 be as * bor

for great atchievements, and palifonately fond
glory, his continual success was no inducnnt t
him to enjoy the fruits of his labours, but became
spur to animate him to greater enterprizes. And
he soon loft all sense of present glory, he was eve
seeking fresh honour: thus becoming in a mane
his own rival, he fought all occasions to nake
succeeding exploit efface the splendor of the formc

These motives, -which, to give them theirt julft
mation, are no more than an incapacity of felfe
ioyment, and are not so strong an instance of
greatness of foul in the person who is hereby 'tee
mined, as of the inanity of all human poffefio
these motives inspired Cfar with the design
making war against the Parthians. Betides, his beal
improved by aion, and in the hurry of ans tn
he was never so disordered as when at reft, and
employed. But his pretence was the defireofav.
ing the Roman name, and of effaciag any difgr
they might lye under by Crassus's defeat. And th
appearing the motive, the Romans, who had nothi
so much at heart as their national honour, could
but applaud the enterprize.

But Cxfar's views were not simply confined to
Parthian war; not to mention his design of c-
sing. en passant, the Daciaps, for their frequeet
curons into Thrace and Pontus he propotd, ah
having defeated the Parthians, to go, by Hyrcan
to the borders of the Caspian sea, to pass mount Ca

'EWri TS (pCu fitty.'Su'
5s a 7 p V^rr^us ax
6i P"^#; c PtIi
'i-n iTtr 5UV vuzmrystic, a\\ iiapxs s
Smfy ?Tc l
E i& I"
>W rra, r r^^ t, nruxT;n' *vr'r ic VpfihfiX#TUt x xxfll Ep7x , h; dt 1sst
ifh T. *rlaresr TC r *'S-; i r srip'i, i & uts Ci , mrTai i <^«it ;

'tru 1 it» C'i ys>»>"* C'i;c T i.-jfut.iu siórt f n i < )>'"' f
tfi l .ir-rS. PLUT. Caf.

cafu

cafus, then to penetrate frto Scythia, whbo frightfill A W7
deserts he was to traverse' h order to' comb into Ger- ,4.
many, and lastly to rettirn, by Gaul, rito Italy.
Thus nothing but the conquest of all the then known
world, aid the poffefiion of an Empire, which had
scarce any other limits than the cean, could'fatisfy
his towering ambition.
The necessary preparations for so grand an enter-
prize seemed sufficient employment for one man: but
nothing was so extensive as Carfar's genius. Various
designs, which were all uncommonly grand, divided
his attention, withouttlther fatiguing him, or divert-
ing him from his principal point. He intended to
add to the ornaments of Rome, by two superb edi-
ices, of which he had already taken the plan and di-
menfions, and laid the foundation. One was a the-
atre of an immense extent at the foot of mount Ca-
pitolinus; the other was a temple to Mars, which
was to be bigger than any yet in the world. These
two works were finished by his fuccefbor. His taste
for learning engaged him to employ the learned Varro,
in forming a library of all the Greek and Latin au-
thors, which he intended for the use of the public. He
had also formed a design of abridging the laws,
which by reason of their number were become ex-
tremely vexatious, and to retain no more of the civil
law, than what flould be found useful and necessary.
And he procured a Senatufconfultum, which ordered
geographical defcripticn to be made of the whole
empire, wherein were xaaly to be marked the roads
and their distances.
He also intended works of another kind, and of
an immense expence, but which tended greatly to the
public utility. Such as, draining the Palus Pomp-
tinus, a lake of a very great extent in Latium, en-
tirely useless, and extremely unwholesome; digging a
new bed for the Tiber from Rome to the sea, in order
to facilitate its navigation; making a port at Ostia
capable of containing the firft-rate hips, and cutting
put roads through the Appennine mountains, from the

Adriatic

AR. 7O . Adriatic a to Rome: laly, he purpod to divide

A C. the Isthmus of Corinth, to save the feamenthe touble

of going round by Peloponnefus. The magnificec
of all these designs muff be allowed, though prbhan
some of them were fcarcc to be effected by ani u-
man power, and have been since in vain attempted
by various Princes, such as the draining the lake,
and the junction of the Egean and Ionian seas.

To this aftonilhing multitude of designs, we must
yet add the rftoration of two cities, no kei famous
for their destruction, than for the figure they formerly
made in the world, Carthage d Corinth. Their ruin
happened pretty near the fame time, and they were
much about the fame time re-eftablilhed, by the Co.
lonies the Dilator ent thither: or if he did not carry
this project into execution, it was at leaR of his con-
trivance; and it was from his memoirs that Augulus
rebuilt these two cities, which afterwards acqured a
reputation not far flort of what they had originally
.enjoyed.

Whilst Cafar's thoughts were taken up with these
grand projefts, a conspiracy was formed against him,
which was not only to defeat in an instant all his
designs, but to deprive him of his life. Which tra-
gical adventure it is now necessary to describe.

SECT. IL
C.ear's clemency. He refufis to accept of a guard. &.

veral circumstances which render him odious. His ra.
diness to accept of honours, and exorbitant privi~gt.
Arcgance in his difcoure, and behaviour. Dene of
Royalty. Mark Anthony tenders the Diadem to CGrfr.
Public re/entment to CGefar. Conspiracy againf his life.
Brutus's cbarat7er. Cassius the firfl contriver of th
conspiracy. He engages Brutus, who becomes tbe ria-
eipal manager. They are joined by Ligarigs and/ set
ral of Cafar's former friends. Brutus's prudence
the choice of his aociates. Cicero is not let into tk

/frtt.

icrel. rebnius prevents tb affair being prop fid so
/ltby : and Brutus opptfes his beig pit to death
witb Cefar. 9be nmber of the Conspirators increae*
to upwards of sixty. Several of their names. Sw-
pringg courage of Porcia the wife of Brleus. Her
busband lets her into tbe secret. he Conspirators de-
termine to kill Cafar in full Senate. Cefar begins to
avefme fupicions of Brutus and Caiuas. He r.es
ith prediions of a Soothfaer. Ca/ar's opinion as to
what kind of deatb is mofj eligible, His wife Calpbur-
nia'sfrightful dream. Cdfar is inclined not to go to
the Senate-boufe, till persuaded to the contrary by D,
Brutus. An intimation sent him of the confpiray,
bwich never came to his knowledge. Resolution and
tranquillity in the Conspirators. bTey meet withfeve-
raldifappointmentr. Cefar's death. He falls at the
foot f Pempey's atue. Diferent opinions in relation
to Cfar's rur/her. Without doubt be deserved death.
Brutus's conduet reproachable. Short ref.ettions on
Cefar's cbaratler.
C SAR's clemency, confidering how he was A. R. 70
C circumstanced, was certainly beyond example, Ant.C.
ad seemed to secure him from any attempts that
might be made by his countrymen to disturb his tran-
quillity, or horten his days. He had carried this
noble inclination of foul to its full extent, not only by
pardoning a great number of his inveterate enemies,
but latterly by permitting all, without any diitin&ion, suet. Caf.
toreturn to Rome, and enjoy their rights and privi- 7
eges. He even did not exclude Pompey's most
2zalous partisans from the highest honours: of this I
ight cite Brutus and Caflius for examples, who, at
tis very time I am now treating of, were inveted
ith the Pratorfhip. Nor was his moderation or
mildness to be diiturbed by the several reflecfions
Bung out against him, both in writings and discourse;
and he readily forgave the authors, or at least thought
them not worth his resentment. With regard to Pom-

, he never spoke of him but with esteem and re-

verence

AR. 7oS. veence: and when the mob, to pay their coutt

At. . him, overturned the ftatues-of that great man, Cfai
Cic. ad ordered Anthony his Collegue to replace them:
am. VL which gave Cicero an occasion very ingeniously to
Pfut. ca obrve, " that Caesar, by restoring Pompey's ftaues,

secured his own." He observed the fame behaviour
with refpe& to Sylla, to whom he had always had
an averion, but whose statues hE would not susser to
be demoliihed.

Such magnanimity must be universally applaued,
and the more so as in him it proceeded from inclina.
tion, and he did not want advilers to incline him to
cruelty. This is hinted at by Cicero in a paffgof
his oration for Ligarius: " If in * the high ation
you are in, fays he to Cafar, you had not maintained
that natural fund of goodness, I fay natural, ad I
have my meaning, the vitory, you have obtained,
might have been followed by an almost general mourn-
ing. For it might well be expeEted, that among the
Conquerors there would be several inclined to dispose
you to cruelty, when we even find some such among
the conquered."

Caesar's moderation therefore cannot be too
commended: and of all the honours whereby the
impious adulation of the Romans ranked him with
the Gods they worlhipped, he seems to have the jufteft
Dio. L. claim to the consecration of his statue, which they set
XLIV. up in the temple of Clemency, giving its haad to

that Goddess.

Caesar imagined that he had succeeded, by dint of
generosity, in procuring the affetion of the citizens,
or at least that he need have no apprehensions of them.
He was sensible that one-half, that is, those who ha
always served him, must necessarily be attached to
him through inclination and interest; and the ree,
* Si in hac tanta tua fortuna lenitas tanta non efdet, nm ta
per te, per te, inquam, obtines, intelligo quid loquar, acerbilflo
lut-u rednndaret iia viEtoria. Qm muiki eim elent de vianibs,
qui te crudele ee eilent, quam etias de vitis reperiaur ? Cc.
pro Lg. n. x5.

throug

through gratitude, s they were indebted to him for ?.o
theirlives. On this principle, (hie fallacy, ~whetl .t'
an usurper such as he:was is concerned, I have before
exposed,) heperifted in not taking a guard. Atd Veul. I.
notwithstanding the remonstrances of several of his 5' cAp
noft intimate friends, particularly Hirtius and Pans, It.
who had a real eftelm for him, he fill persisted in his
Tefolution, even at times when he was not without
ipprehenfions: but he reje&ted their advice, faying,
that it was better to die once, than to live in perpec
tual alarms.
Yet had his condu& been blameless, and had he
been careful to aoid giving any offence, he might
have-hoped to have lived unmolested, But fevetal
tircumtances, for which there was no eXcuife, evinacd,
that notwithstanding his superiority of genius, he was
not proof against the seducing influence of Sovereign-
,; and that his understanding, which had so often
hewn on other occasions its strength and vigour, was
unable to support prosperity.
Of this nothing can be a stronger proof than the Freinfih
ficility with which he accepted the most extravagant cxvI. ,
honours. I have already handled this point: but i
mult yet further add, that they decreed him all kinds
of divine honours, sacrifices, incense, libations, ahar,
temples, fixed feasts, Priests, and lastly the appella
tion of Jupiter Julius: and Anthony his Collegue
was appointed the Priest of this new Deity. They
lfo bestowed on him all imaginable' titles of power
ad dignity. Besides those 1 have already mention-
td, they ftiled him the Deliverer, and ordered the
onftru&ion of a temple to the liberty which he op-
effed. He was declared sole and perpetual Censor,
r Infpe&or of morals, PrdftSlus morum. A decree
passed that the title of Emperor, and the High-prieft-
hood should be hereditary to his children and grand-
hildren, though he at that time had no issue. And
rders were given for statues to be ere&ed to him in
.cvry temple and in every city: and particularly two
1athe Rostra, one of which wore he Corona Civica,

implying

Ao implying that he had saved the citizens aad

44, other the CoronaObfidionalis, because he had deivc

his country. He had also a tatue erected to him
Quirinus's temple, by the epithet of the invinc
God; and another in the Capitol, subsequent to tho
of the antient Kings of Rome, in the midst of
was L. Brutus, the author and avenger of the publ
liberty. These two last Ratues seemed to be pac
rather ominously for the person they were intended
honour. Quirinus, or Romulus had been tor
pieces by the Senators, as a tyrant and opprffor
his country. And Cicero fays in a letter to Atticus

* I am better pleased to fee Cafar associated
Quirinus, than to the Goddess of Safety." As f
Cafar's statue, which was placed near that of th
elder Brutus, it served as a hint and encouragement
the Brutus who afterwards became the principal
piator.
I hall conclude this tedious detail of so many
fatteries by a yet more extraordinary one than any
have already mentioned, wherein all regard to modet
D>. decency, and decorum, was totally negleted.
sA-t c. Cfar was known to be of an amorous conftitui
52* which he made no scruple to indulge, there we

some who, being ask'd their advice in the Sena
were of opinion, that he ought to be allowed
make use of as many women as he pleased, witho
any regard to their rank or condition: and it is affe
ed, that Helvius Cinna, a Tribune of the people e
tirely devoted to the Di&ator, had prepared a a
for that purpose, which he was to propose in his a
fence, though it had been contrived by his orders..
suet. ae: Czfar had gone too far in suffering, and what
78. l 'ut yet more inexcusable, in extorting o many de

full of the basest fattery, and which, rightly confida
ed, were no less dithonourable for him to whom
were dire&ted, than for their mean contrivers. B
the arrogant manner with which he received
* Eum ,'rtn QTairino malo, quan Saluti. Cc. ad Att. X. 4l

mark
I

narks of the public servitude incrafed the general A.R . .
difuf. For when the whole body of the Senate, At^ C.
preceded by all the Magi~ras, came to present him
(me a&s which they had paed in his favour; Caesar
gver quitted the Curule Chair in which he was fitting
before Venus's temple, or according to others, in the
aiddle of the Rostra, but only gave each of them his
band. This arrogance strangely offended not only the
Senate, but the people, who thought the majesty of
the Republic despised and degraded, by the treatment
their august representatives had received.
There are some who are for excusing Cifar, and
y that he would have risen, but was prevented by
oeofhis friends, or rather of his flatterers, Corne-
ius Balbus, who said to him: " Have you forgot
that you are Cefar, and that it is fitting you receive
with dignity the homage which is due to you ?"
But others on the contrary aerr, that when he was
idifed by Trebatius to pay the Senate the proper
mpliment, he took this advice very ill, and gave
ia look which sufficiently denoted his reentment.
it how it will, he had no sooner committed the
t than he was sensible of it, and pretended to ex-
ae i by faying, he at that instant perceived himself
g into a fit, which he was afraid his standing
uld so far increase as to occasion his falling. But
s reason was only thought to be a pretence, the
er as he was afterwards seen to return home a-
iot.
This brought to mind the resentment he had him-
ilf hewn on a like occasion, and it was remembered
at he did not so easily pardon any want ofrefpe to
iperfon. For in his first triumph, as he paired by
Tribune's bench, one of those magistrates, named
tius Aquila, happened not to rife from his fear,
hich so offended Cefar, that he immediately asked
, " * why he did not claim the administration ?"
d for several days afterwards, he never promised,
'Xepete ergo a me Rempublicam Tribunus. SUET. Cef. 78.

or

.R 7S. or graed any favour, without im all, addU i
'" " providd Pontius Aqdia consent to it,? ;,

The. fevend inftana~l9 very unwor y;diCi
.md difcor a furprifi itannefi in fget-;m
and an. imprudece fcarc to be accouteii or, in
excnfive -agenius. And yet this difcoutkwas fitabi
to his behaviour, and he. was frequentlyrheard ofay
" * that the Republic was no more than a fd
without substance, a name without any reality. T
Syla knew not what he was doing, when he ad
cated the Di&atorfhip. That he expex; to be ftoL
to with more refpcA; and that whatever he fa
ihould be confidered as a law." Such exprei
highly cxac rated the Romans, who wte. co
with having their liberties invaded, but eptd
at lead there might be: some external daornm
served. .., .

Czfar fum'd up all his indiscretions by an a ita
of Royalty, which he was unable to fupprcfs, or.
ceal: and by this means he furnished his
with the most specious pretence they could h
fought for, and induced many to attempt his lie, w
otherwise would never have thought on it. His
biion might well have been satisfied, In fat he
King; but he wanted the appellation: and the
could not satisfy him, unless he also had the title.
Fa;icapit. Of this he gave several proofs, on fevc oa

sions. The 26th of January, as he returned
Mount Albany, where he had been to celebratet
Ferim Latine, he entered the city in Ovation: T
piece of state, however mean and contemptbl i
might appear after so many magnificent trimd
yet as it helped to feed his insatiable vanity, was
Suet. Cf. unacceptable. Some of his attendants, who poba
-9. Piut. were hired for that purpose in order to found

io people, among the several acclamations with

* Niil efle Renpublicam: appellatione: modS, fine core
ifcie. Sullam nefciffe literas, qi Di:aturum depofuerit.
;v:mines confideratiis jam loqui fecum, & pro legibus haberequ
i a3t. SvET. Cf. 77.

they
6

they honoured Cefar's entry, proclaimed him King. A.R. 701
But the mob, infiead of lhewing their approbation, AC
testified their aftonifmment by their silence: and the
Di&ator, who was sensible of it, made answer, that
he was not King, but Cefar." Hitherto he had done
nothing which could be taken hold of, and at most
had only given grounds for suspicion but the fol-
bwing instance put it out of all doubt.
A man of no rank having on this very occasion put
aCrown on Cafar's statue, two of the Tribunes, Epi-
&us Marullus and Cefetius Flavus, ordered the
Diadem to be taken off the tatue, and committed the
an to prison. They also made enquiry after those
who had sirss proclaimed Cfar King, and having
lfo sent them to prison, intended to prosecute them.
Cafar, in point of policy, ought certainly to have
commended the zeal of the Tribunes. On the con-
ary, he complained bitterly of them in the Senate,
under pretence that they had robbed him of the glory
declining an honour which had been illegally con-
rred on him; and he accused them of endeavouring
t make him fufpeted of aspiring at a tyrannical
Ower. Nor did he confine himself to simple com-
ints, but insisted that they should be removed from
Mir office. Helvius Cinna their Collegue, seconded
le Ditator in his revenge, and procured a law to beJul.
paed, whereby they were deposed. Nay, Cfar°bf'e
ied his resentment so far as to insist that Cfe-val.Ma
i's father should disinherit and disown his son :V. .
t the father absolutely refused to comply with so
ust an order: nor could Cafar, who even in his
test as of injustice always preserved ome senti-
ets of generosity, be offended at so laudable a re-
Nution. However, this adventure betrayed his pri-
te thoughts, with regard to Royalty; and not-
itanding the false allegations which served as a
Pence for his resentment to the Tribunes, there was
one so dull as not to discover the real motive.
Or had there been any doubt remaining, Anthony plU ear
k care to remove it, and that in the most public & Aton.
OL.IX, - Z man-

A.R.-or. manner. This happened during the celebration o:
Ant. c. the Lupercalia, a festival sacred to Pan; and Antho

ny, though at that time aual Consul, officiated a!
one of the Luperci, or Priests of this extravagant
ceremony. I ay extravagant: for these Priests rar
naked about the streets, with whips in their hands,
with which they struck all they met: and the Ladiel
of the first falhion endeavoured to be under their lath
being of opinion that it procured fruitfulness. Whil
the city was amused with these extravagancie
which passed for a religious ceremony, Cefar was
the Rostra, feated on a golden throne, dressed in th
triumphal robes, and crowned with laurel. In thi
situation he was accosted by Anthony, who prefente
him the Diadem. The universal murmuring of a
prelent was a sufficient hint to Cafar to decline th
offer: and the huzzas which attended his refusal te
tified the people's approbation of his condu&. Ho
ever, Anthony made a second attempt: and was me
enough to prostrate himself before the Dictator, asi
were to excite his compassion. But the people, wh
manifested their disapprobation by a profound filen
prevented Cfar's accepting what he so ardently de
fired. Instead of putting the Crown on his head, h
placed it on his throne: but perceiving that the pe
ASet. Dio. pie were not yet satisfied, he ent the Diadem toth

Capitol; faying, that Jupiter was the only King
the Romans. He however permitted that it Ihoul
be regitered in the Fafti, that is, in the journ
wherein were set down all the memorable events
the year, that on the Lupercalia, the Consul Anthon
having by order of the people tendered Royaltyt
Cafar, at that time perpetual Diaator, he had re
fused to accept of that honour.

It were needless for me to observe, that this who
scene had been concerted between Cefar and Anth
ny; as the thing speaks of itself. But it may be n
ceffary to take notice, that all these unsuccessful at
tempts could not prevail on Cefar to abandon his
vourite scheme. But as he found there was no p

bili

bility of his ever being acknowledged King in Rome, A. R. o0.
he formed a projec for having that title conferred on Ant. .
him at least in the provinces of the empire. For this
purpose L. Cotta, one of the Priests, to whose cuf-
tody the Sibyls books were confided, was to repre-
sent to the Senate, that according to the Sybils pre-
diftions the Parthians could not be defeated, un-
less by a King: and that consequently it would be
proper, that Cefar hould take upon him that dig-
nity, in order to go and subdue them. And proba-
bly it was from the many obstacles which he met
with, in Rome, to the accompliihnment of his withes,
that he began to conceive a dislike to that capital, and
that he first thought of quitting it, and transporting
the feat of the empire to Alexandria or Ilium.
All this seems very strange, and will appear more
so when we add, that he himself was perfetly fenfi-
ble of the danger he exposed himself to, in assed-
ing Royalty. For the day the Diadem had been of- P,,,.
sered him by Anthony, when he returned to his house, Anton.
he laid his throat bare, faying, that his enemies had
nothing to do but to strike, as they had now the most
plausible pretence they could wish for, to justify their
taking away his life.
His observation was just and it was at that very
time that the conspiracy, wherein he fell, was first fct
on foot. The Romans in general were extremely ir-
ritated against him, for the reasons I have mentioned:
and the public resentment shewed itself in several fla-
grant inflances, though their authors took care to be
concealed. At a nomination of Consuls, Cafetius ,et. ct.
and Marullus, whom the Dicator had deposed, had 6o.
agreat number of votes. I have mentioned that a
fatue had been erected to Cafar in the Capitol ad-
oining to those of the Kings, in the midst of whom
sod the rfatue of the elder Brutus, holding a naked
iword in his hand. Some one had fixed to the pe-
deRal of Brutus's statue the following infcriptioni
" ou'd thou cou'dft come to life again !" and to

Z 2 Cafar's

A. R. 70o. Cafar's A "Brutus, * for having expelled the Kings,
Ar.. c. was created the first Consul; and this man, for hav-
pluct. C ing expelled the Consuls, is at last made King." M.
& Brt. Brutus, who was invested with the Practorian dinity,
.~Fia. became now the obje& of every one's hopes, and he

received several invitations to hew himself worthy of
his name. He frequently heard it said: " We want

a Brutus :" and he found on the Tribunal where he
fat as Judge, several billets and inscriptions, which
reflected on his inaction: " You are are asleep, Bru-
" tus: you are no true Brutus."

However, he continued not long thus inactive, but
soon became the chief conductor of the conspiracy
Not that those popular and anonymous exhortation
were his principal inducement, or that he himfelk
was the first contriver: Cassius was the person wh(
first engaged him in the conspiracy. But before]
proceed, it will not be improper to draw the charaer;
of these two men, the last avengers of the Roma
liberty.

MB. M Brutus pretended to be descended from the d
der Brutus: though Dionysius of Halicarnassus ain
some other writers will not allow him this illuftrio
original: and I cannot think that it was flattery alon
which induced these authors to degrade the profeffe
enemy of the Cefars. If the deliverer of Rome ha
left any issue, it were next to impoflible that the
should not make a figure in the Republic. And y
for upwards of two hundred years after the death,
the elder Brutus, history mentions but one of th
name, a plebeian, who was concerned in the peopl
retreat to the Sacred Mount, and was one of the si
Tribunes: and when, after the interval I have nm
tioned, the Brutus's appear invested with the Cun
ofices, they were looked upon as a new race of nm
But as, at the time I am now treating of, this fam

* Brus, quia reges ejecit, Consul primus fatus eft,
Iiic quia consules ejecit, Rex poftrem4 fadus ft.

had for upwards of two centuries enjoyed the princi- A. R. 7?s
pal honours and pofls in the Republic, it is no won- Ant.
der that, from the resemblance of names, it hould
have ingrafted itself on the patrician house of the
first Brutus, and that that opinion Ihould then prevail
with the public.
So that M. Brutus was reputed to be defeended,
on the father-fide, from the Author of the Roman ri-
berty; and on the fide of his mother Servilia, Cato's
lfter, he was incontestably descended from Servilius
Ahala, a generous defender of that fame liberty, and
rcorded for having slain Sp. Mmlius for asseting
the supreme power. As he was born with extreme
good natural parts, he took care to improve them by
e Rudy of Philosophy: and blending with the mild-
ness and sobriety of his manners the principles of an
fiful and honourable aivity, he is represented in
history as the most amiable and most virtuous among
ie Romans,
He had certainly a noble model before his eyes in
ieperfon of his uncle Cato, who became also his
father-in-law; and his whole study was to imitate him.
His mildness was far from being natural, being ra.
ther of a sanguine disposition, yet he never determined
rahly, but prosecuted strenuously what he had once
efolved. This was very justly remarked by Cafar,
who often observed, speaking of Brutu ! * That
"young man, said he, is never indifferent in his deter-
"minations, for what he has once concluded, he vigo.
"roufly asserts." No follicitatiorns or applications, that
Wre not supported by juftiec, could have any effect
nhim. He thought it feandalous and unworthy a
grat man, to comply with a request, for want of re-
iution to deny a person to his face: and he used to
f that he fufpe&ed those had not passed their youth
?ery wifely, who had not leared to fay No.
' Magni refert hic quid velit: fed quidquid vult, valde vult.
iC. ad Att. XIV. .
Ia ntert thiok it hould be Nam, as I have uaflatcd itr

Z 3 Nor

A.R.7-c. Nor was he less studious to adorn his mind than tc
Ant. C. instruct his heart; and to virtue he added inftrufion,
44 which have certainly a very near affinity. I have al.

ready said that he applied himself much to the study
of Philosophy, which at that time almost wholly turned
on the principles of natural religion and morality: and
he had with him the Philosopher Arifto, who, though
no great Orator, yet by his behaviour did honour to
his profeion.

Eloquence, that necefary instrument to a Statesman,
especially in a commonwealth, was his next concern;
and this he practised both in Greek and Latin: for
which purpose he retained in his family a Greek Rhe-
torician named Empylus, from whom he took his
lefbons. And herein he so far succeeded as to be
re-putd one of the best Orators of the learned age:
and Cicero in the treatise which he called by his name,
·' Brutus", and which he composed under Cafar's ad-
ministration, regrets that there are no opportunities for
diplayin tso excellent a talent. " You * raised
ycu;rilf, flvs he to him, with an uncommon progress
to the reputation of eloquence; and I am concerned
to fee that the nmisfortune of the times has interrupted
vcur courie." However, it appears, by some -other
passages in Cicero, that Brutus's eloquence was too
ci.' a.V much tinged with philosophy: which made his dif-
^.x..:-.courf:s appear dry, and in ome measure detroyed

their efiet. However, his pleadings before Cefarin
Aia, in the behalf of Dejotarus, were very pathetic,
ar.d what is more, successful; since he thereby pro-
cured him, his pardon from an incensed judge, andfe-
curcd him a great part of his revenues.

Brutus had a natural inclination to study; it was
his favorite occupation whenever affairs would permit
hi.; nror did it forsake him even in camp. While
he feired under Pompey, whenever he was difen-
gzged from that General, he amused himself with his

* In t r Br'- t. Rnte, dc.!eo; cujus in adolefcentiam per media
i:uc -.::. !i c'j:d::; ve;.ntrm tranfverfa incurrit mifera fortuna
.ipjb..-_. C:c. rut. 33. ,nk

books,

books. The night preceding the battle of Pharfalia, A. R. 7o'
after a very fatiguing hot day, whilst the reft slept, Ant. .
or ruminated on the morrow's event, Brutus was read-
ing and making extracts out of Polybius. That His-
torian must certainly give him pleasure, from his
judgment and perspicuity; and his reflections are the
more valuable, as he speaks from his own knowledge
having himself served both in a civil and military ca-
pacity. When Brutus afterwards came to have the
command of an army, he did not forget what had
ever been his chief entertainment. For the very even-
ing before the battle of Philippi, he dedicated some
time to reading. As he slept but little, he spent part
of the night in drawing out his plans, and making
the necessary dispositions for the morrow; and then
fat down to reading, until he was interrupted by
tome of his chief officers coming into his tent, to levee
him.
Such was Brutus: and the several instances we
have related of him hitherto perfectly agree with his
charater: his aversion to Pompey, his father's mur-
therer; which, however, did not prevent his iding
|ith him, as oon as he saw him at the head of the
henefter part, and the sole resource of the Republic;
the frankness with which he surrendered himself to
Cefar after the battle of Pharfalia the prudence,
mildness and moderation with which he governed
Cisalpine Glul; all these qualities served to ingratiate
him with Casfar, who, even had he been less deserving,
could not but love him, as being the son of Srvliia,
and perhaps his own. Brutus had it at his option to
become one of the first in Cafar's friendihip, and to
benext to him in power: and perhaps he might have
ielded to such alluring temptations, had he not been
warned by Cassius's friends to be on his guard.
' Do not susser yourself to be melted and enchanted
' by Cfar, said they to him, but shun the caresses
" and favours of a tyrant. His intention is not to do
" honour to your virtue, but to impair your courage
" nd detroy your vigour."

Z 4 Caf

A.R. -o. Cassius, who for a long time had meditated Ctfar',
Ant. C. death, and who even, according to Cicero, was neai
Cic.Pbil. putting it in execution in Cilicia, at the mouth o
II. n. z6. the river Cydnus, ought to be confidered as the fire

contriver of the conspiracy. However, he could noI
himself first break it to Brutus, as there had been for
some time a misunderstanding between them. Yet
they had very powerful inducements to be on good
terms with each other; being brothers-in-law, by
the intermarriage of Junia, Brutus's sifter, with Cat-
fius; besides, Cassius had obligations to Brutus for
having sooner and on better terms obtained his pardon,
from Cafar, after the battle of Pharfalia. Bt they
happened to be nominated Prztors at the fame time,
which occasioned a dispute between them, which
hould have the precedence. However, they sub.
mitted the decision to Cxfar; when Caflius pleaded
his superiority of years, and claimed some merit from
the services he had done the Republic, in the Par-
thian war, after Crassus's defeat. Cefar himself was
of opinion he ought to have the preference, but he
was over-ruled by his affection to Brutus. " Caf-
*' fius's reasons," said he, " are certainly the more
"' cogent: but Brutus must have the precedency."
This determination, which did not appear equitable,
even to the judge who gave it, was looked upon by
the adverse party as a heinous affront. Caflius dif
continued visiting Brutus, and his hatred to C-far
became more strong and violent. For besides the
public reasons, he had had for a long time a personal
pique to him: and it is from this foundation that fe-
veral have made a great diftincion betwixt Brut
and Cafflus, with refpet to the conspiracy. Theyfait
that Brurus could not brook an unjust usurpation o
power; but Cassius's resentment was personal, an
his hatred was to Cefar, and not to the tyrant.

But Plutarch will not allow that there was an
foundation for such a reflection; and to instance C
fius's natural detestation of tyranny, he cites a tranf
stion of his while he was yet a child. Cafius was at

the

he fame school, and had the fame master as Faustus A. R. 7o
Syla, the son of the Dictator. Faustus one day took 4C
i into his head, in discoursing with his school-fellows,
o brag of his father's Di&atorihip, which so far ex-
aperated Cassius, that he struck him on the face with
his sift. This affair occasioned much talk; and Syl-
ls friends and relations insisted on fatisfation from
tc aggressor. Pompey undertook to decide it, and
sent for the two children. When Cafilus came before
him, he said to young Sylla with an air of resentment:
,1 Repeat the fame discourse in Pompey's presence,
and ee whether I ihan't corre& you for it."
This ation without doubt is a proof of what Plu-
arch advances: and an aversion to tyranny was so
common among the Romans, and indeed is so to all
mankind in general, that it may easily be believed to
e so in Caffus: But then this aversion might be
tengthened by his particular dislike to Cefar. There
was certainly no resemblance between Brutus and
Caflus, in point of equity and moderation; the
latter being of an enterprising, haughty, implacable,
ambitious temper; and who made no scruple to fa-
trifice justice to his interest, or in order to serve his
party; as we shall find in the sequel of this hiftorv.
Nor indeed could it be expeted, that he hould have
ay great regard for virtue, from the philosophical
es whose doctrines he pursued being a profeft Epi-
curean. It is true his ambition preserved him from
that inaction, indolence and inattention to public as-
fairs, which were the maxims of his inftruaors. But
it is impoflible that he, who places the sovereign good
in pleasure, and whose will is his law, ihould have any
regard to honour and justice.
As soon as Calffus, from these motives of public
and private resentment, had determined to form a
conspiracy against Cefar's life, he began by founding
his friends, who all promised to aflift him, provided
Brutus would take the management upon him. " We
" muR not build our hopes on our numbers, said they
' to him, nor even on our courage; but the essential

" point

AR 7o.-" point is to get such a man as Brutus at our head
At. . " whose name alone canjuflify our undertaking. With

"out that, we shall want resolution in the execution
' and our measures will be liable to censure: for nc
· one will be persuaded that if we had had equityon oui
" fide, Brutus would have refused to join up." In si
high eteem was Brutus's virtue, which he enjoyed
unenvied by Cassius, who, to shew his approbation, was
willing to make the first advances to his brother-in.
law, whom he had not seen since their quarrel about
the Pratorihip.

Accordingly he waited on him, and after a recon.
ciliation made, and reciprocal assurances of friendlii
given, he asked him if he should be at the Senate the
firt of March, which day, he had heard, Cfars
friends intended to move for conferring Royalty on
him. Brutus having answered that he hould not be
there; " But how will you at," replied Caflius,
· if we should be personally cited ?" " My duty
" then, said Brutus, will teach me not to be silent,,
; but to defend the cause of liberty, though death

should be the consequence." These words encou-
raged Cassius, who now made no scruple to explain
himself. " And is there a Roman living," replied
he with ftome warmth, " who will susser you to die
-- before him ? Can you possibly be so ignorant of
" your worth ? or can you think that the inscriptions
" which you have read on your Tribunal were laid
, there by the mob and people of no consequence,
" and not by the principal and most dignified persons
,' in the Republic ? Let other Praetors display their
,' munificence, and exhibit public hows and com-
, bats of Gladiators: from you it is expeced, as a
·- debt due to your name and to the glory of your an-

ceftors, that you effe& the deftrution of tyranny.
' All the honest citizens are ready to run all hazards
' in your defence, if you will but convince them that
, they may depend upon you." After this explana,
tion, Brutus hesitated no longer to enter into their
proposals; and from that moment his and Caflius's

S thoughts

thoughts were wholly employed in associating a num- A. R. 70
ber of friends, whose fidelity and courage could be 4,
relied on.
Ligarius, who had been some time before accused,
ad acquitted, in the manner I have related, was the
firt to whom Brutus made his application. He knew
that Cafar's clemency had not so much weight with
Ligarius as the affront which had been given him;
and that his resentment was as strong as ever against
the person who had made him sensible of his danger,
fore he thought fit to extricate him. Brutus there-
fore paid him a visit, and finding him in bed, on ac-
count offome indisposition, " My dear Ligarius," said
he to him, " what a time do you chufe to be ick in ?"
Ligarius, whether he had already been informed of
heir designs, or that the natural dicates of his heart
prompted his judgment, immediately understood his
meaning, and raising himself on his elbow, replied;
|" If, Brutus, you are forming any design worthy of
" ou, I am well."
Ligarius was imitated by several others, who, as
well as he, had been old partilans of Pompey, and
could not forgive Cefar for having defeated them.
That an enemy, notwithstanding any apparent recon-
ciliation, hould relapse, is no ways astonishing; but
that muff be matter of surprise to every body, tho'
it the fame time it will serve as an instance that an un-
lftufurper, however brilliant may be his qualifica-
tons, cannot be certain of any one person's affe&ion,
that several of Cafar's friends, men who had been
a along attached to him, and had served him from the
eaking out of the war in Gaul, to the defeat of
Pompey's children, entered into the conspiracy. And Sen.dera,
Its to no purpose for Seneca to ascribe their change III. 3.
t an insatiable avarice, which no rewards could fa-
fy. This reason perhaps might hold good with
me, and might influence their determination. But
that those who had all the reason in the world to be
ftisfied with the returns Cefar made them; that a
Trebonius and Decimus Brutus mhould engage in an

attempt

ALR 70. attempt upon his life; the former of whom had bee.

a c- Consul, and the latter was to be in two years time

and was atually ser down in Cfar's will as one oi
his collateral heirs: what inducement could the)
have, but a thorough sense of his oppreflions and
injustice to the Republic, and an inclination to free
their country from a Tyrant who meditated its ruin

The managers of the conspiracy observed gre
circumspection and reserve in the choice of their cn
sidents; so that though Cicero was strongly in thei
interest, and notwithstanding there was no doubt
his fidelity, or zeal to serve them, yet they did n
think fit to intrust him with their design, left his na
tural timidity, augmented by the damp of ye
might be starting obstacles; and his too greatwar
nets and precaution might retard an enterprize whic
had need of the utmost dispatch. Without doub
Cicero bore great enmity to Cfar, but it had neve
carried him so far as to tempt him to engage in
conspiracy against his life. And when his nephe
Quintus, whose character and disposition were euall
detestable, endeavoured to prejudice him by ininu
ting to Cefar's friends, that it would not be imprope
to be on their guard against him, Cicerofaidin
letter to Atticus, " I Ihould be apprehensive ofth
consequences of such a discourse, if I did not per
ceive that our Tyrant is sensible of my want o
courage."

Statilius, whom I have mentioned in my accoun
of Cato's death, as threatening not to survive him
and Favonius, that servile imitator of Cato feene
to be made on purpose to enter into a confpira
against Czfar. However, Brutus did not think f
to come direcly to the business with them, but b
dropping some hints touching the present admini
ftration, had a mind to fee how they tsood affeed
And finding they did not answer his expetation, b

* ;.C', ., nifi viderem scire regem, me animi nihil habere. CcC
ad Att. XIII. 37.

difcon

ntinued the conference, under pretence that the A. R. 7^
ba was too intricate, and so left them. Favonius Ant C.
dadvanced, that a civil war was a greater evil,
nthan an unjustifiable fubmiflon to the tyranny
one person: and Statilius, pursuing the Epicurean
nciples, which he profefled, was of opinion that it
became a man of sense, to expose himself to dan-
sand fatigues, to please a set of knaves and fools.
beo, who was present, declared himself of a con-
iry opinion, and endeavoured to confute them.
Whereupon Brutus judging him worthy of his confi-
knce, privately made him acquainted with his inten-
ins, and found him apt and ready to join the aven-
ers of liberty.
Labeo informed D. Brutus of the plot, and endea-
sured to engage him in it. This Brutus was a man
of no remarkable resolution, nor by any means qua-
ified for any hazardous enterprise. But it was judged
it might be serviceable to the Conspirators on ac-
taunt of the great familiarity betwixt him and Cafar:
dides, as he intended shortly to present the people
with some public hews, he was provided with a con-
I[derable body of Gladiators, who might prove useful
in the confusion which the Di&ator's death would at
it infallibly create. Accordingly Labeo and Caflius
made their proposals to him: but he returned them
no answer, till having consulted M. Brutus, and
found that the affair was to be under his diretion, he
made no difficulty to be of the party.
The conspirators had also some thoughts of making Plut.Brut.
hie fame proposal to Anthony, who was on very & Anton.
good terms with several of them. But Trebonius op-
posed it, assuring them they would never succeed.
He told them that he had some time ago, at
Narbo, founded Anthony; when Cafar was on his
return from the last Spanilh war. That Anthony very
ell understood his meaning; but did not eem in-
dined to engage with him: though he was sure he
had inviolably kept his secret. Whereupon some,
iunning from one extreme to the other, proposed kill-

ing

. R. 7o.ing him with Cafar, as being a man of an haught
ACt. c insolent, tyrannical temper, who might do the

much disservice, by influencing the troops, and I
the power which his office of Consul invested hi
with. But Brutus declared himself against it, as 1
piqued himself on preserving from all refleions
injustice, an enterprize, which in his opinion w
founded on justice, and only undertaken in defence,
their liberty and laws. Besides, he did not despair th;
Anthony, whose sentiments were noble and generou!
would, as soon as Cefar fiould be no more, be ser
fible of the glory of restoring liberty to his countr]
By this means Brutus saved Anthony: and it wa
agreed, that at the time the blow was to be given, car
ihould be taken on some pretence, to get Anthony ol
of the way, that he might not be a fpetator of Cafarl
death.
suet. Gal- By the extraordinary altiduity of Brutus and Cafiu
ba. c. 3. the number of the Conspirators amounted to upwar

of sixty, all persons of diftinaion, being either Knigh
or Senators: the chief of whom, besides those
have already named, were Servius Galba, who ha
served as Lieutenant-General under Cafar in th
Gaulilh war, and who was become his enemy, a
cording to Suetonius, because he had refused him th
Confulfiip: Servilius Cafca and his Brother, Tilli
Cimber, Minucius Bafilus: all of whom had becom
Partizans of Pompey, when Pompey was no more
Among those who had always been enemies to Casa
history principally mentions Cassius of Parma an
Pontius Aquila. The reft, who, as I have said
compleated the number to sixty, are either totally un
known, or at most only by name.
Flut.Brut. Nor was there one among them who in any refpe

betrayed the confidence reposed in him, either b
shewing any diffidence, inconstancy, or by any kin
of indiscretion; though they were not bound by an
oath, but wholly confided in each other's word.
s-n. Ep. Nor could wine itself extort the secret from Tillius

Cimber, though he was remarkably addisted to

drink,;

drink, and who once jokingly said, speaking of his A.R. 7a.
darling vice, " How can it be expected that I, who Ant. c
cannot bear wine, hould bear with Caesar !"
A woman also was let into the secret; or rather,
hiving half discovered their design, he compelled
them to a confeflion. This was the noble Porcia,
whose constancy was no ways unworthy the glory of
her father Cato, or the reputation of her husband
Brutus. As this latter had taken upon him the ma-
nagement of so hazardous an enterprize, wherein were
engaged all the virtuous and noble part of Rome,
whose fortunes depended on his conduft, he was sus-
ficient mailer of his passions to preserve an air of fe-
renity free from all suspicion during the day-time
and in public: but when he retired to his family and
during the night, he could not maintain the fame con-
ftancy, and his wife perceived that his breast laboured
with some great design, some agonising care, which
he endeavoured to conceal. As (he loved her hus-
band tenderly, he was desirous to share with him in
his inquietude. But before she demanded any ex-
planation from him, hfe resolved to make a very ex-
traordinary trial of her own constancy. She took a
small knife, and having ent her women out of the
room, stabbed herself with it into the thigh. The
wound bled copiously, and the anguilh which at-
tended it, was quickly succeeded by a fever. Brutus
was in the utmost consternation, and knew not what
to think. Then Porcia, in the extremity of her
sufferings, addressed him in the following manner:
"Brutus, I am Cato's daughter, and was given you,
"not merely to hare your bed and table as a mif-
"trefs, but to partake of your good or ill fortune,
"Your behaviour to me has been irreproachable.
"But how can I erve you, or in what manner can I
"prove my sense of your goodness, unless in assisting
you to support a latent uneasiness,. and to calm
"your disturbed quiet ? Why then am I denyed your,
"confidence ? I know that women in general have
no great reputation for' secrecy: but a good edu-

"cation

A.R- o. " cation and suitable company have a great influ
Ant C. ence on the dispositions and tempers, even of wo

"4 men: and who has a better right to make a merit

of these advantages than Cato's daughter and Bru.
" tus's wife ? However, I relied not so much on what
· is pafled: but am now satisfied, that pain itsel
" cannot get the better of my courage." On con
eluding these words fIe ihewed him the wound e
had given herself, and at the fame time declared to
him her motive for so doing. Brutus was wrapt
wonder and admiration of her constancy, and wit
uplift hands implored the Gods, that by fucceedi
in his enterprize, he might attain the reputation o
being an hulband not unworthy of Porcia. He after
wards communicated to her the whole scheme of th
conspiracy, and had no reason to repent the confil
dence he reposed in her, and which lhe had so we
deserved.
su5t.Cza. The plot being so far advanced, there was n
Lo. time to be loft; wherefore Brutus, one night, as

fembled all who were in the secret, and who were to
have any share in the execution; and at that time
they adjusted all their measures. It had beendebat
whether they mhould attack Caear in the field of Mars,
whil he presided at the eletion of the Magistrates,
or coming into the Theatre, or in the sacred ftet
leading to the Capitol: but they concluded to kil
him in full Senate. Which determination appeared
doubly advantageous to them; first, as they had an
opportunity of assembling without giving any urn
brage, being almost all Senators; and in the nex
place, as they expected being instantly seconded and
supported by the principal persons in the Republic,
who, they hoped, as oon as the Dicator should be
slain, would publickly espouse the cause of liberty.
The circumstance of the place where the Senate wa
to assemble, the day of the ides of March, appeared
to them of good omen, and even to have something
preternatural in it; it being an apartment built by
Pompey, contiguous to his Theatre, and bearing

his

his name, and within ornamented with his flatue: so A.R. 708.
that the Conspirators were of opinion that the very Ant. C
Gods had taken care to bring Pompey his vitim.
All these intrigues could not be conduted so fe-
cretly, as not to give some cause of suspicion. Cfar
rceived information of their nightly meetings, and
e began to have some of Brutus and Caflius. For Plut. Ca:.
one day when he was cautioned to be on his guard & Brut.
ginft Anthony and Dolabella. "Oh ! fays he, it& Anton.
is not those plump, jolly, well-dreffed fellows that
I am afraid of: it is of your pale meagre ones."
Under which description he glanced at Brutus and
afius. Brutus in particular appeared formidable
shim, on account of his courage, the severity of
is morals, and the number of his friends. But then
hen he refle&ed on his mildness and probity,
apprehensions instantly disappeared: and once
lhen he was advised not to trust him too far,
What! (fays he, clapping his hand to his body) do
you imagine that Brutus will not flay till this de-
bilitated carcase has finished its career?" He thought
at after him no one-had better right, than' Brutus,
expea the principal poRfs of honour and power in
Ctme.
Had Cafar been disposed to give credit to prodi-
s or predictions, historians relate several events
hich might have alarmed him, and have served as
caution to him to be on his guard: unless we sup-
fe these faas to have been for the most part invent-
or at !east not taken notice of till after his cata-
ophe. But he did not even give any attention to a suet. C

extraordinary and circumstantial prediction, s.
hich portended his life's being in danger for the Piut. Ca
pce of thirty days, to the ides of March inclusive.
his way to the Senate he met the very Soothsayer,
name Spurinna, who had acquainted him with this
tdition, and in a jocose manner observed to him
Itthe ides of March were come. " It is true, re-
plied the Soothsayer. but not gone." Perhaps this
1a might have had some intelligence of the intend-
VO. IX. A a ed

A. R. 7oS ed conspiracy: or may be, he by accident ftumbed
Ant. c on the truth, which has ometimes happened, in-the

profession of an art the fal(hood of whose foundaton
is not to be disputed.

Nor must I here omit an exprefioR of Cs
which was looked upon as ominous, after his death
and has something remarkable in it. The vclein
before his affaflination, he upped with Lepidu
Where, as he was ever very moderate in his diet a
never unemployed, whilst the reft were at supper,
amused himself with reading, and forting some le
ters he had received. Some of the company ha
pcned to put the question, what death was mot el
gible. Cafar broke off reading, and anticipatingt
reft, laid, " that which is least expeted." And :
very thing happened to him which he seemed to d
fire. Yet he was very near being kept at home a
escaping the danger, by the entreaties of his wi
Calphurnia, who was terribly alarmed at a fights
dream she had had.

She dreamed that she supported him in heram
all bloody and covered with wounds: which occ
iloned her to fob so piteously, that Cafar overhea
hvr. When they rose, she conjured him by allth
. as tender, to flay at home and not go to the Senat
Caiohurnia's apprehensions made so much the firon
impression on her husband, as he had never oblfe
in her the least inclination to superstition : and not
ir very vell, he was almost persuaded not to
W-,hereupon sacrifices were made and Augurs c
iulted, who all declared the signs they found in
entrails to be of ill omen.

Caxfar therefore gave orders to Anthony to go
dismiss the Senate. But Decimus Brutus, who h
pened to be present, infifled strongly on the contra
He was sensible, that the measures of the Confpirato
of hom he was one, would thereby be entirely
sea:cd; and that there was reason to apprehend, t
it once their er.:erprize failed, it would be difcove
He rep.r-fened to the Dictator, " that he furni

2

bs enemies with arms against himself, That the Se-A'-70
Date, whose intent of assembling was to confer on A.
him the title of King, and the Sovereignty of all the
?rovinces beyond Rome and Italy, would take such
delay extremely amiss, and as an affront meant to
tm. That should it be told that august Assembly,
tat they must defer their deliberations till Calphurnia
tould have more favourable dreams, every body
would confider it as an a& of tyranny, nor would it
b possible for Cafar's friends to convince his accusers
*at he did not intend to reduce them to a tate of.
uvitude. And laitly, that if no arguments could
iuade him from proroguing the Assembly, he had
taer go himself and propose it to the Senate." De-
[tus concluded his discourse by taking him by the
1ind, and as it were led him out of his house.
This instant was of the utmost importance to the
;onfpirators : for the secret was discovered, and Ca-
i had like to have been acquainted with it. When
Fcame out of his house, there was a save who en-
voured to speak to him; but not being able to
ie near enough to him by reason of his many
tndants, he went into the house, and desired Cal-
urnia to secure him till Cafar's return, he having
ething to communicate to him of very great im-
ance.
In his way to the Senate he received a circumftan-
account of the whole conspiracy, which was ac-
lly delivered into his hands; but he had no op-
unity to read it. Artemidorus the Greek Philo-
her, who assisted several of Brutus's friends in the
ecution of their'ftudies, had made several fatal
Overies. He drew up a memorial of what he had
overed, and joined the persons who presented their
'itns to Cafar. But observing that the Di&ator
ered each paper as soon as he received it, to a
retary, he came close up to him, and as he de-
tred his memorial, said to him, " Read this, and
10fe no time: For it concerns you much." Cafar
It the memorial; but by reason of the numbers

A a 2 which

A. R. 7--. which surrounded him, and to whom he was obliged
Ant.- 1to give audence, it was not possible for him to read

it, and he entered the Senate-houfe holding it in his
hand.
r-tt.-Bt. There the Conspirators were ready to receive.him.

Brutus had come there alone, unaccompanied: the
ref had at:nded Cafiius, whose son had that day n.
tered into rran's eltate and taken the customary ha-
bit; and after the ceremony they all met in Pompey'
psrtico, v.'h r te Senate had been convened:

Plutarch oblerves that any fpeator, who ha
known the fcret, must have been struck with admi
ration at the resolution and intrepidity of these me
wvho, though they were upon the point of executin
so hazardous an enterprize, yet maintained a fereni
in their locks and aions, as if they intended nothin
iore than ordinary. Some of them were Preto
and acLt.ally fat as judges, hearing the pleadings wit
all the pretence of mind imaginable, discussing wh
pcints aroli in the proceedings, and giving fuchjud
m.ent as the nature of the cale required. And when
person, hom Brutus had condemned, threatened
ppt al to Cafar, Brutus replied with great indifferenc
Ca:far neither docs, nor will prevent my feeing th
" law.vs oblerved."

I-owever, leveral accidents happened, capable
creating a ccnifufon among the conspirators. T
f.-!l and principal -as Calar's delay in coming,
c:nrecd, as I mentioned, by Calphurnia's sea
Then Cafca, one or the Conspirators, .had like
have divulged the secret, through an ambiguous co
1lh:ent th:.t was paid him. One of his acquaintan
came up to him, and aid, " You thought to beve
" fcrer, but B;utus has acquainted us with the who

afair." Cafca tho.ght this man had been inform
of their deign, and had he immediately replied, t
v.hole had ben clicovered. But this furprize ga
the other time to add with a simile, " What the

rr. frier.d, are you all on a udden grown n
" ero:gh t :.and for the Edility ?" These wor

cos

composed Cafca, who trembled to think of the dan- A. R. 70.
ger his inadvertency had like to have led him into. Ant. c'
Brutus himfeif had a most violent hock to sustain;
word being brought him, that his wife, who had
been for some time indisposed, was at the point of
death. Porcia, who had drawn the secret from her
husband, in the manner I have related, when the im-
portant moment approached for putting it in execu-
tion, was seized with a most deadly panic. The least
,oise alarmed her: she enquired of every body who
came from the city if any accident had happened to
Brutus, and sent messenger after messenger for infor-
mation. However, as there happened ibme delay in
the execution, she was unable any longer to fpport
her concern. She grew pale, and prelently loft her
fitnes; and her attendants with difficulty got her into
her chamber, where they put her to bed. It was
judged she could not survive; and an account of this
ctident was immediately sent to Brutus. HIe was
much concerned, but not so far as to be drawn off
from his present purpose. The interest of the cause
which he had taken upon him to patronise, was fupe-
ior to any private concern, how tender and affecing
lever.
At this instant Cfar arrived: and that the Con-
ipirators might not be free from alarms to the last
roment, they perceived a Senator, Popillius Lsenps,
iho went up to the Dictator as ioon as he came out
f his litter, and spoke to him for a considerable ti-.e
with nuch emotion. The Dictator seemed to hear
inm with great attention. Now this Popillius Lanas
mtc time before had come to Brutus ard Caflius,
tad aid to them : " I wish your design may succeed,
and advise you not to defer it: as there are feve-
ral private accounts of it." From this discourse
ey thought Popiilius was no stranger to their de-
an: and when they saw him speak to Cfar, they
ld their friends, to whom they had communicated
hiat Popillius had said to them, made no doubt of
(ter being dilcovered and betrayed. An universal

A a 3 con-

A. R. 7cS consternation reigned among them: they looked at
Axt. C. each other, and agreed by signs not to wait till they

w ere seized, but to kill themselves to prevent the ig-
nominy of a public punifliment. Already Cassius and
tome others had laid their hands on the daggers they
carried concealed under their robes, when Brutus,
obierving frcrm the geflure and attitude of Popillius
tha: he appeared rather as a suppliant than an accuser,
quickly perceived his error: and as he had nooppor.
tuniky of speaking to his associates in so mixt a corn.
pany, he, by the serenity of his looks, and composure
of his countenance, endeavoured to make them un-
deritand that they had nothing to fear. In effe&, as-
ter forre minutes further conversation, Popillius kifled
the Didator's hand, and retired, and Csefar cameinto
the Senate.
s:- . C . All the Senators rose from their feats to receive
C,;t Ci .him, and the Con!pirators surrounded him, and con-
&a rut. duted him to the curule chair; whilst two of them,

Decirrus and Trebonius, flopped Anthony at th
door of the hall, amusing him with some ficitiou
tfory cf their own invention. Tillius Cimber appeare
at the head of those who encircled Caesar, pretendin
to foilicir that his brother, who was in exile, migh
have liberty to return to Rome: and all the ret fe
conded ]hi; with reat earneilnefs, and took hold
Cafar's hands, under pretence of kissing them, i
order to excite his companion. The Dicator, how
ever, could not be prevailed on, and perceiving him
self crouded, endeavoured to rife. Whereupon Cim
her laid hold of his robe with both his hands an
itripped it frcm his fboulders, which was the sign
agreed on: and as Cfar was faying, " This is n
" acing like suppliants; this is open violence;
Calca, who was behind his chair, fta bed him in th
shoulder; though very lightly, his hand tremblin
in the beginning cf so hardy an enterprise. C,
turned about, and perceiving Cafca, " Wretch," fai
he, " what are your designs ?" and at the fame timn
wounded him in the arm with the tile of a tablet h

ha:

d in his hand. Cafca immediately called to his A.R. 7o.
brother, in Greek, to come to his afliftance. Then Ant. C
ll the Conspirators drew their daggers, and Caesar,
in endeavouring to get from them, received a second
wound in the breast, which after his death was
judged by the physicians to be the only mortal one,
if all that were given him. Notwithstanding his loss
ofblood, and the uplifted daggers which threatened
is immediate destruction, he did not give himself up
to any mean fear, but stood undaunted, like a lion,
inthe midst of the hunters. Some fay that he did not
peak a single word. But others assert, that when he
erceived Brutus coming up to him with a drawn
agger in his hand, he thus tenderly reproached him:
' What then, my son, are you also of the number ?"
And immediately after, covering his head, and
ipreading his robe before him, in order to fall with
tegreater decency, he submitted to be murthered,
ithout making any resistance. They were all defi-
nus of sharing in the honour of the action; and even
iter he had fallen to the ground, their resentment
continued so strong, that they had no regard to their
own safety; as appears by Brutus, who received a
wound in the hand.
Cxfar received three and twenty wounds, and fell
iefore Pompey's statue. Whether this circumitance
ras entirely accidental, or that his murtherers had
urpofely dragged him there, it, however, did not
ass unobserved ; and all who had any regard for Pom-
py's memory, took a pleasure to imagine him, as it
were, a witness of the revenge taken on his enemy,
who was murthered at his very feet.
It is remarkable that Cafflus, who was an Epicu-
ran, and consequently believed the foul to be mor-
i, yet in order to encourage himself to the ation,
dressed his looks to the statue, and as it were in-
ioked Pompey, as still capable of intereffing himself
athe tranfacions of this world. Natural affection,
that instant of enthusiasm, had got the better of

A a4 re-

A. R 7. refletion, and made him forget his profefTed prin
Ant. C. ciples.

Cfar's murder, at the time it happened, occa
sioned a diversity of opinions; some confidering it a
an heroic ation, and others esteeming it an unpar
donable crime. And this division of sentiment in foml
measure subsists to this very day ; Cfar's many goo
qualities inspiring many with a resentment to hi
murtherers; at the fame time that those, who profef
therfelves enemks to injustice, oppression, and a
unlimited ambition, are inclined to applaud Bru
for what he did.

This whole aff'ir seems to turn on two quetion
Whether Cfar deserved death; and whether tho
who killed him had a right so to do.

As to the firfl, I find no difficulty. There is
wide difference between parts, and virtue. Nev
man pofiefied all the qualities which constitute th
hero, in a higher degree than Cafar: but never ma
made a greater abuse of them. If it may be allowe
that whoever by violence subverts the governme
under :-hich he happens ro be born, deserves death
ir, in a Monarchy, the fu'Liea who dethrones h
X.nog, merits the ievereft punishment; can it be doub
ed, that in a Republic, the citizen who appropriat
to his own uife the authority of the fiate, is an Usurp
and a Tyrant, a.id oughr to forfeit his life, fordan
to violate the laws ? had it been poflible to impeac
Cifar, and let him fairly take his trial, I cannot thi
any one v.ould have blamed the judges for condem
inr him.

But bcc: c a man deserves death, it does not f
low that everv cne indifferently has a right to killbi
No crirrinal is punishable but by the proper m
giftrare, and his power is limited by the laws. T
permit every private person to kill a man because
thought in a tyrant, would be putting a sword
the hands of fanatic ftry, to the destruction of Prince
whole right of inheritance, and perhaps the fervic

the

they had done their country, would be no proteEtion A.R.- 7tl
against an insult on their lives. The many fatal ex- At
amples our history furnilhes of this horrid bigotry
will be ever recent in our memories. The light of
reason alone, independent of Christian morality, which
from its first institution has been averse to all effusion
of blood; I fay, reason alone seems to me sufficient
to condemn all tyrannicide, notwithstanding the pagan
antiquity eflteemed it meritorious. Brutus therefore
was culpable for having arrogated a power which only
belonged to the Republic and its laws. He punished
a criminal, unordered and unimpowered, and confe-
quently, so far from being esteemed the lawful aven·
ger of the liberties of his country, he ought to be con-
fidered no better than an homicide.
We may further add, from Seneca, " that his ac-
tion* was no less imprudent than unjustifiable, and
that at the very time he engaged in it, there was an
utter impossibility, as affairs were then circurnftanced,
that his hopes flould succeed. For what grounds
had he to expe& the restoration of liberty, in a city,
where power on the one hand, and fubjecion on the
other, equally found their advantage ? or to imagine
that the Republic would resume its ancient form of
government, when its members had no longer any re-
mains of their original probity ? or lastly, that any
regard should be paid to equity and the laws, in a
country where he had seen so many thousand men
embroiled, not to repel slavery, but for the choice of
a maifer? He either very little understood human
nature, or was very little acquainted with the history
of his own country, not to perceive that from the
aihes of one tyrant, another would spring up; and
'Brutus in hac re videtur vehementer erraffe... qui ibi fperavit
libertatem futuram, ubi tam magnum pramium erat & imperandi &
ferviendi; aut exiftimavit civitatem in priorem formam posse revo-
car, amiflis priftinis moribus; futurarmque ibi aqualitatem civilis ju-
fs, & ltaturas suo loco leges, ubi viderat tot millia hominum pugnan-
tia, non an fervirent, fed utri. Q.anta verb illum aut rerum natur,
aut urbis fuN tenuit oblivio, qui uno interempto, defuturum credidit
'Uiam qui idem vellet? SEN. de Benef. 11. o.

that

A.R 70o. that the greatest happiness which could befal Rome,

C. would be to have so mild and merciful a mailer as

Caxfar." The fubfcquent events are but too strong a
proof of what has been here observed; and we flall
find, that till the Empire was thoroughly fettled,
Rome underwent o many calamities, that it never
enjoyed so great tranquillity as when under Cefa's
dominion.

He himself had foretold as much; and as he often
difcouried on the dangers to which his life was exposed,
Suetonius relates that he frequently said, that his
safety was nor of so great importance to him, as to the
Republic. That for his own particular, he had ac-
quired glory and power., sufficient: but, if any acci-
dent hould happen to him, the Republic would in-
itantly lore all its tranquillity, and be more fatally in.
volved in civil wars than ever.

Cazfar was killed in the fifty-fixth year of his age,
and he was forrv years old when he began the conquest
of Gaul: So that the great ations which have im-
mortalifed his name, and the proofs which he has
given of a genius and capacity more than human, are
comprised in the space of about fourteen years. He
was born to command mankind, if great qualities
were alone sufficient, and superior to right, Had his
birth or a regular election placed him on the throne,
he were an example to be imitated by all Sovereigns.
But his private conduc would be a very bad model;
his whole life being a continued scene of rapine and ex-
tortion, luxury and profusion, and a devotion to all
kinds of scandalous debaucheries.

* Femnt dicere folitum, non tam fua, quam Reipublicae interdel
ut falvus effet. Sc jamnridem otentis glorieque abunde adeptum:
Rerr.pu'!icam, si quid fibi evenire:, neque quietam fore, & aliqlanto
eete-iore conditione civilja bella fubituram. SUET. Caf. 86.

SECT.

t 363 3
SECT. IlI.
Cefr's death occasions a great consternation in the Senate
axd among the people. Tfe Conspirators take pojeffion
of the Capitol. They are favoured by the Senate. A
conderable body of the people and the oldiery declare for
Antbony and Lepidus, the chiefs of the contrary party.
Brutus endeavcurs to appease the people, and treats with
Anthony. The Senate meets, and decrees that Cefar's
death hfall pass unrevenged, but that his afts shall be
confirmed. His will is to take pl4fe, and bis funeral is,.
rdered to be celebrated with all imaginable honours.
Reconciliation between Brutus and Anthony. The Go-
vernmaens of te provinces cnferred on the principal
Conspirators. Cefar's will opened. The people's as-
feion towards him revives. His funeral. Anthony
speaks his funeral oration. Ihe people's resentment to
the Confpiraotrs. lielvius Cinna is mistaken for the
other Cinna, Cear's eemy, and torn to pieces. An-
thony endeavours to regain the Senate. He procures a
decree to prevent any abue being made of Cear's me-
morandums r papers. Aboli/hes the Ditatorjhip. Puts
the pretended Marius to death, who excited the people
to mutiny. Agists the re-ejiablijhment of Sextus Pom-
peius. The Senate grants him a guard, which he ex-
tends tofix thou/and men. He vends forged afts, puh-
ikhed in Cafar's name, and, by that and other means,
amiaffes immense fums of money. Brutus is in want of
troops and money. The project of a military chest for
the use of the Confpiratorsfails by Atticus's refusal.
They endeavour toftrenglhen their party in the provinces.
The Ccnfpirators quit Rome. Anthony takes their Go-
vernments from them ; gives Syria to Dolabella, and
lakes Macedonia fcr himself. OQavius's arrival at
Rome difioncerts bis cbemes,

SUCH

.A.R. cs. t UCH was the horror and consternation of th,
An^t. j Senate, during the execution of the Conspirator
Sut. . cf. cfign on Cafar, that it continued silent and motion
.&;q less; nor was there one among them who eithel
& Brut. & tought of securing his own safety by flight, or of as
Anton. siing the D.rtator: But as oon as Ca:far was killed
acvpli. when Brutus brandishing his bloody poignard in the
io, l. air, attempted to harangue the company, and parti.
XLIV cu!riy 3a.:-tr. ;J himself to Cicero, they inftamly

brc4e up in the utmost confusion: they made t
ioreft .ay to the dors; they eagerly prefed whic
fh iJ et out tne first: they fled without being par
fuel. For it had been agreed by the Conspirators i
coun:;l thnt no one ihould be killed but the oppress
of the Republic, and that all the citizens hould b
summoned to liberty. Anthony and Lepidus, wh
judged they had molt to fear from their known friend
ship and in:imacv with the Dicsator, took helter
the neighbourhod; from whence, the first havin
laid aside all confi;lar marks, retreated to his own
houfc, which he immediately put in a state of defence;
the oher went to Tiber-ifland, where there happened
to be a lesion, which he marched into the field o
Mars. In an inrtant the news of Cefar's death fprea
itfeir through the city, and occasioned the utmost con-
fusion : All the shops were immediately hut: many
took to their arms, and hoping to turn the present
troubles to their own advantage, as there are never
wanting such on the like occasions, began to plunde
and ccnmi;ni a1: l-rts of outrage: so far as to wound,
and even kill tome of the Senators. The Confpira-
tcrs did not think it proper to increase the disorder,
by putting in execution what they had at first in-
tended in relation to Caiar's body, which was to drag
it to the Tiber. They contented themselves with
leaving it exposed to the view of an infinite crowd of
people, whose curiosity brought them to fee it: and
after a certain time the body of this man, who a mo-
ment before ;ade the whole universe tremble, was

taken

taken up by three slaves, being all that remained of A. R7.
his numerous retinue, and put into his litter; but with Ant. C
o ittle decency, that all the way to his house his
arm hung out at the litter door.
Brutus and his friends, being thus deserted by the
Senate, endeavoured by themselves to appease and
ain the multitude. They marched out of the Se-
nate-houfe in great order towards the Forum, their
kft arms folded in their robe, and in their right
ands holding the bloody dagger; and they caused a
apto be carried before them at the end of a lance,
asan emblem of liberty. They advised all they met
to be under no apprehensions, but to think of enjoy-
ing the liberty they had just procured them. Their
tecent behaviour and their peaceable discourse in some
measure produced a calm. But Brutus did not think
itrafe, absolutely to confide in the then present dilpo-.
ition of the people: he rather chose to retire with his
ffociates to the Capitol, under pretence of returning
thanks to Jupiter, and he made himself mafier of the
place through the affiitance of Decimus's Gladiators.
There were Ibme who in their march joined the Con-.
pirators, being desirous to be thought of their num-
er. But no body was so far deceived by them: and
without reaping the fruits of their vanity, they paid
dearly for it in the end; being comprised, by Caesar's
avengers, in the penalty of an action, which the pub-
lic would never allow them the honour of having
committed.
Cicero was for having the Pretors convene the Se- Cic. ad
nate to the Capitol: and the advice was good. That Att. xiv.
augut assembly almost generally detested Cfar, by
whom they had been so frequently degraded. 'They
intheir hearts wished well to his murtherers, and it
was only their fear and furprize which had prevented
their declaring for them at first. As soon as that
subSided, had they been aflembled, they had certainly
taken the moRt advantageous measures for Brutus's
Cause, and in which they themselves were no less in-
rtrefted. Perhaps, from the circumrtances, Cicero's

advice

-R. oe.advice was at that time impracticable; if fe, th
A.c. greater the Conspirators misfortune. But if it wen

poflible, how great was their imprudence to let
so favourable an opportunity !

However, there were ome Senators who came to
confer with them at the Capitol, and particularly Do.
labella, who claimed the Confulhip from Ceiar'
death. He was to have entered into that office,' as
have already observed, upon the Dictator's: ett
out for the Parthian war. As the place became
cant by Cafar's death, Dolabella thought he had a
right to the fasces: and I do not fee any thing to
contrary. But it certainly very ill became him to de-
clare against his benefa&or's memory: the more so
as his motive was not any zeal for liberty, but the
mere effet of ambition, and a conformity to the times.
Nor was he long staunch to his new party: for aser
some steps taken for their support, the wind happen-
ing to change, he veered about, and became tdr
most bitter enemy.

Though Brutus and his friends were supported by
all the considerable persons in Rome; yet it did not
prevent the opposite party's becoming considerable.
Anthony and Lepidus, who undertook to revenge
Cefar's death, or rather under that pretence concealed
their ambitious and tyrannical designs, werefupporte
by the majority of the people, and by all the military
force in the city. Luckily for Brutus, their number
was not considerable. Besides, Anthony had another
very great advantage, in having secured Cfar's pa.
pers and effects, which had been delivered to him by
Calphurnia. As both parties flood in fear of each
other, and moreover as the Chief of the party which
at that time appeared the strongest, from his natural
mildness and moderation, had his whole thoughts
turned on peace, the bufnefs soon became a matter of
negotiation: and Brutus employed the very day of
Caesar's death and the following, to endeavour to gan
Anthony and the multitude.

Being

Being surrounded by a great number of citizens in A. R 7t.
the Capitol, he harangued them with that fund of Ant. C
ood sense and of virtuous maxims, so natural to him;
but not with so much force and vehemence as Cicera
old have wished. However, his discourse had so
much success, that he ventured to come down from
the Capitol, accompanied by Cassius. He mounted cic. a4
the Rottra; addressed the people in general, and was Attic.
heard with silence and refpe&t. But the Praetor L. X.
Cornelius Cinna spoilt every thing by his extravagance
tad want of decency. He railed against Cafar in a
most outrageous manner: and went so far as to strip
himself of his ornaments of office, which he said he
had received from a Tyrant, in breach of the laws.
But the people, who had a veneration for Cefar's
memory, expressed their indignation by their fhoutr
ind menaces to Cinna. This accident intimidated
Brutus, and he immediately returned to the Capitol.
He was even under appreh'ensions of beins besieged
there: and as a great many persons of diftiCndion had
followed him, in order to afift him with their advice,
and to hew their affeEtion towards him, he took
care, from that spirit of equity which influenced all
his actions, to dismiss them; not being willing to in-
volve those in any danger, who had had no share in
the tranfaaion which might possibly prove fatal to
him.
However, he Rill negotiated with Anthony by thecic. Phil.
mediation of ome persons of consular dignity, and II. s
by their means various messages passed between them.
But Cicero would by no means be engaged in it. He
even advised the negotiators not to trust Anthony,
who, as long as he was under any apprehensions,
Youid promise every thing, but would resume his
usual character as soon as the danger was over. How-
ever, it was agreed that both parties fiould fubmir to
the decision of the Senate, which ;.vas to be assembled
the next day, the 17th of March, in the temple of
the Goddess Terra. The Conspirators were sensible
ktw well the Senate was afftcted to them, and for

that

A. R. 701. that reason they submitted to its determination witl
A C.' no les joy than confidence. But Anthony potted f.

diers at all the avenues of the Temple, who, undei
pretence of securing the quiet of the affeibly, em.
powered him to influence and govern it pretty near to
his wish.

The firif thing to be confidered was, what treat.
ment Czfar's Murtherers were to have. As oon as
the debate began, the whole Senate was in confusion.
The importance of the ubje&, the warmth with
which it was discussed, add to this the uncommon fa-
'tisfaction of delivering their opinion with freedom as.
ter four years refraint, all theft caufcs produced a
great diverfiry of entiments. Some (among whom
suet. rib. was Ti. Nero, the husband of Livia and father of the
4- Emperor Tiberius) were of opinion that Brutus and

his associates ought to receive honours and rewards.1
Others, without taking notice of any rewards, which
was what the very Conspirators did not expe&, re-
turned them solemn and public thanks. And the]
least favourable were for granting them impunity.
But there were some who observed, that before any
thing could be determined relating to the Confpira-
tors, it was necessary previously to examine into Ce-
lar's character and memory, because the treatment
which his Murtherers were to receive dependedon
what idea they might have of him. The drift of this
argument was to have Caesar declared a Tyrant: and
Anthony, who perceived their design, and found that
the majority were strongly disposcd so to do, ingeni-
cuflv larred an objection which had never been
thought on, and which nevertheless was otvious.

He rpresented that if Cafar was declared Tyrant,
i: was necessary that all his acts and ordinances fould
be repealed: v;hich was impracticable, because thoie
acts affecting the whole Enpire, the inevitable con-
sequence of their abrogation would be an univerfall
confusion. " But without extending our viewsfofar,
" added he, let us begin by fettling one single article.
" All of us, who are the leading men of the Senate,

" have

" have received favours from Cefar: and it is to him A. R. 708.
, we are indebted for the dignities and employments An4 C.
,, we have had, now have, or hope hortly to enjoy. In
"what manner shall we adjust this point ?"
This refle&ion of Anthony totally changed the face
of affairs. The subjet of their debate appeared in a
inew light; and rhofe who imagined they were only to
pass their judgment on Cfar, perceiving that their
own personal interest was no less concerned, grew
more moderate in their resentment. There were
many of them whose nomination had by no means
been regular, and for whose service the Dic&ator's
power had supplied the legal qualifications. For in-
lance, Dolabella had been made Consul, without be-
ingeither of the proper age, or having pafled the
Prtorfhip. And he and all who were in the like
drcumftances were apprehensive of the risk they run
ffeeing themselves sacrificed. It was to no purpose
tat the zealots observed to them, that there was no
intention to firip them of their posts, but only to
confirm them therein by a legal authority. In vain
-idfome who were actually interested set them the
aarnple, and declared themselves willing to resign
yfavours they had received from the Dictator; in
ps of losing nothing by such a resignation. The
greater number were for running no hazards, nor
rrilking the certain advantages they then pofeflied,
the uncertain events of popular votes.
This altercation lasted a long time; and while the
tate was thus employed, Anthony and Lepidus,
we may credit Appian, left the house, to try how
they might rely on the mdb which was assembled
the Forum. But finding them divided, and that
e peaceable party seemed to counterbalance the party
ich was for revenging Cafar's death, Anthony de-
ined to give up Something for the present, and
it a more favourable occasion.
He therefore resumed his discourse, and advised
Senators to reflect, from the difficulty they mec
to fettle one single point, what would be the
VL IX. B b c(onfu-

A-R. 7o confafion they would cause in the Empire, if the
At. C. pretended to repeal all Cafar's as.i He particular

infited on the hazard they run in relatiqn t the vg
ttrans, some of whom already compose pqwr~ Is:Q
lonies, where they had been incorporaezd, i th
reft, who no less expeted to be recompenfd mad
a great clamour in Rome, and had the precediq
night been at all the Senators houses, threaeini
their deftrucion if they were not hortly provided fQ
and fettled. He desired to know if campon prn
dence would allow them to undertake in the face
those old warriors, whose affetion to Cetfar ws
well known, ignominiously to drag his bdy t
river, which must be done if he was declared Tyr
And concluded, that since for the fake of public ra
quillity all thoughts must be laid aide of revengi
his death, that fame consideration obliged them
ratify all his acts.

This medium, which seemed to unite all theirii
terests, was generally approved. Each party o
tained in ome measure what they wanted; and we
apprehensive, by insisting on more, to lose the who
Anthony perceived the Senate too much inclined
favour the Conspirators to think of compelling the
to do any thing to their prejudice: and the Sna
having no troops at hand, was not in a condition
force Anthony to desert Cafar's memory. This
the indvucement to a coalition, which was sure offu
fiftind no longer than hile each party stood infe
of the other. Plancus, who was in nomination
the Coniulfhip for the third year after that which
are now treating of, supported Anthony's opini
,.p.hi.. And Cicero was also of the fame way of think

and f it off with all the graces of his eloquenc
citing the example of the Athenians, who on quitti
a painful servitude, had found no other remedy
;,,-.>r.-their misfortunes, than to order, that no refentme
'"" fliould be taken of what was passed. Conformale

this was the Senate's decree, who unanimously
solved, that there hould be no enquiry made into C

f£

far's egth, agd that his aS1t fbld he cfirped. A.^,,.
it is tryq, tI CpOfpiras fes
f s projure4 this 4Lt¥'
clause to q add4d, that thi cnpfirmation was grated
so t fake of te public utiity: which impliid4 that
in their 9Wp opitgp Cefar's .a4 were null and inva-
lid. 8t Alswny having the effesial of whIat he d-
re4d, w<4l4 Rqt jgiigate a point whiqiW
he knew well
nlaogh did not affiE hip. They i}fp infirred ain ar-
ile in this defre, vwhich cpRfirmd the diftribuion
of the lcldp pfomrjid t hw vetprns. J.arly, as
.nthq'iy and Ptq}abeU were at vriance, insomuch
that the fwmes r.fu ed to *clo)au)sdg the otlier as
his CAtll;ge, they were intreaaed to close the public
harmony y ia e..gqciliaio: to which they con-
linted.
Without dtult, this acpmQirodation, which fettle
the grand aiffir of the Confpirato.-s, was not conclud-
td without the agltaace of Brutus and Cagl}u, though
thy wer a; that time in the Capitol And I ci;. ad
apr to think, from. the manner Cicero ecpreffs him- Att. XIV;
elfin a le-ttr o Atticus, thap the whole had been 1
concerted the preceding evening, and that the $epate
enly ftrengthlgped by iti authority the treaty which
had been previously drawn up by the leading nen qs
the two parties. And I think the fame opinion may
beformed of the regulatign mrnae concerning Caar's
will and fune-raj, which, however, was the subjea of
ivery warm debate.
Pifo, C fat's father-in-law, was charged with the
axecution of his will. Several came to him, and in-
linuated that he would do better to suppress it, and
bury him privately. B$t finding that fair means
would not avail, they made use of threats, telling
him he should be responsible fr squandering an im-
mense fum of mrnney which properly belongzd to the
Republic. This was fppofingC Cefar a Tyrant, anl
onlequently his estate and all his poffeions became
ii efcleat, and were liable to confiscation. Where-
Upon Pifo loudly demanded the protction of the Con-
ls. " What means this tyranny, said e, in thofr

B b 2 " very

A.R.7os. very persons, who pretend to have freed us froa
At. c. " a Tyrant. They deny the last honours to an High

" priest; they threaten me if I publish his will; and
· preterd to confiscate his effets. Observe the folly
" of these men ! who expe6c the continuation of what
" Cefar has granted to them, and would annul the
, diipofitions he has made of what immediately be

longed to himself. Gentlemen, the manner
" Cafar's funeral is entirely in your own breats, b
- his will is in my poffeflion: and I hall not betr
" the trust which has been reposed in me, unless foin
"one shall be hardy enough to fend me to the gray
· after him." It was impossible, after having co
firmed Cafar's acts relating to public affairs, to den
him the free disposition of his private effets; or n
to allow him the right of burial, as soon as he ha
been declared to be no Tyrant. Besides, the affa
had been discussed with Brutus, who, notwithftan
ing Cassius's opposition, had consented to-every thin
Pifo therefore carried his point. He was left
liberty to open Cxfar's will and carry it into execution
and the Senate decreed, that the Di&ator's bod
1hould be honoured with a public funeral, that
authorised and defrayed by the state.

Brutus's too great facility led him on this occafi
into a very great error, and made him act direel
opposite to his interest. Cassius was certainly in t
right to oppose Cafar's funeral. The persons ofth
greatest discernment among them were of thefan
opinion: and Atticus in particular strenuously infi
ed, that the cause was ruined, if Cafar receivedt
honours of a funeral. Either Brutus was not aware
this consequence, or judged so favourably of A
thony, as to imagine that a little complaisance wou
gain him to their party. A most unpardonable i
prudence. For the cafe was far different from th
wherein he saved Anthony, for fear of exceeding th
bounds of justice. And he certainly now had as
a right to oppose Caesar's burial, as to kill him.

Ho

However, this condut at first proved advantageous A. R 78
to him. As Anthony no longer opposed him, at lealt AnC.
to all appearance, Brutus had an opportunity of en-
irely appealing the people, and of satisfying the ve-
terans. After having cleared himself, in a long ha-
rangue, from the odious imputations of parricide and
perjury, and after having promised Caesar's veterans
o put them in poffeflion of all they could hope for,
he was applauded by the whole affernbly; who de-
dared they thought it but reasonable that such illus-
nious persons, endued with so much courage and
patriotism, hould be confirmed in their prerogatives,
and restored to their dignities. However, they would
at quit the Capitol till sureties were given for their
hety: and the children of Anthony-and Lepidus
were accordingly delivered to them as hostages. They
hen came into the Forum in the midst of the accla-
nations of the people: and as a mark of their perfect
rconciliation, Anthony took Cafflus to sup with him,
ad Lepidus did the fame by Brutus, whose fiter he
hddmarried. The evening was spent with great free-
dom, gaiety, and familiarity. Only upon Anthony's
Pkingly asking Cassius, if he had still a poignard
lider his robe; " Yes, replied Cassius, I have, and Dio.
a harp one, which I hall not scruple to make
use of against you, if you pursue the steps of him
I have killed."
The next day the Senate again aiembled, at which
e Conspirators were all present. Their whole pro-
edings shewed a perfet harmony. Anthony re-
ived commendations for having by his prudence
d conduct suppressed a civil war in its infancy: and
tars Murtherers received more solid advantages;
e principal Provinces of the Empire were put into
ir hands: and whether by virtue of a preceding re-
tion made by Cfar, or otherwise, the Govern-
n:of Macedonia was conferred on Brutus, that of,
na on Caflius, Asia properly so called vas given i, i. il.
NT-bonius, and Bithynia to Tillius Cimber. D.
Ltas was confirmed in the possession of Cisalpine

B b 3 Gaul,

A. . 70o. Gul, the nearest Pirvince td kdmit, atd garrilbhd

A^C. by good vettran troops, *hb had served ultder C*fat.

This decree for the diftibution b the roihrict , on
account of its confequtlces, will prove of very great
importance.
Suet. Caf. This calm wvas of ho longer tbhtifiafce thah till
83. the opening of Ctfar's will, -which Wtas dohe i'An.i

thony's hoiie. Ctfar thereby appbinted his fifttn
fonps to be his heirs, that is, yoling OaVlu t fuc.
ceed t6 three patts, and the treiiaiifig f6drth t bt
divided equaly betweeh Q. Podiis and L. Pinaius
And towards the conclusion of his will he adopte
Osavius. There was a circurnftahct which pleadet
greatly in his favour, and fluig a fttr'ng bltqby t
the Cbnfpirators, which was, that several of thmi wen
thereby appointed the Guardians of his sots, in cafe hi
Should have one; and to D. Btiutus he had bequeath
{d the reversion of his etate in default of his first ap
pointed heirs.

His leacies to the people greatly gaired theiraf
fettion. Hle left themi the use of his gardens nea
the Tiber and bequeathed 300 * Seftertes to ever
Citizen. This liberality had its effte with the mot
And their ordinary difcouife was, that it was unju!
to brar.d Cfar with the name of a Tyrant; asn
man had ever Ihown more affection for his count
men, or more concern for the State.

His funeral, which as executed with the utmo
magnificence, caused a frelh disturbance. the boi
was exFofed in the middle of the Rostra, on a bed
purple and gold: and near the head, a Trophy w
erected, covered with the robe in which Cfar w
killed. The body was placed in a kind of little ter
pie, which was entirely gilt, and had been built
the model of the temple of Venus Mater. The i
neral File was erected in the field of Mars; whithel
surprising concourse of people of both sexes and of
conditions retorted, to offer up omething precious

W Two pounds £x flillings and eleven-pence halfrenhy.

be burnt with the body. But the funeral oration, with A.R ,70.
which the ceremfny began, was, according to cuf- ,.
tom, to b delivered frorfi the Rostra. This was un-
dertakef by Anthony.
He acquitted himffelf in such a manner as plainly
indicated, that in consenting to an accommodation
with Brutus, he had only complied with the neceflity
oft t tines. He begun by reading the Senate's
decrees which had conferred all kinds of honours on
C2far, and had declared his person sacred and in-
violable. He next put them in mind of the oath
which they had all taken, ot only not to attempt
his life, but to defend hiin against all kind of vio-
lence. He thus artfully revived in their breasts their
iffedion to Carefr, and their aversion to his Murther-
ers. As oon as he perceived that the train had taken
fire, and that the people began to be in a ferment, he
puihed things to an ektremity, and negleced nothing
which might urge them to vengeance. He presented
to his audience Caesar's bloody robe; and as he unfold-
ed it, he took care they should observe the number
of stabs in it. Lastly, in order to present them with
a yet more affecing idea, as he could not hew them Appian
the body itself, which lay on the bed of state, he sup- Civ.. 1..
plied one of wax, as big as the life, and wounded in
the several places where cafar had been tabbed. This
image moved by springs, so as to be able to turn any
part to view.
This fight, which Anthony accompanied with the
most pathetic lamentations, completed the people's
refcntment. It knew no hounds. Some were for
burning the body in the Chapel of Jupiter Capiroli-
rus: others in the hall where Catfar had been ahffl-
nated. However, the authority of the Prietts and
?agitfrates prevented there excefles, which might
have been the ruin of the finest and nl)fl sacred edlfi-
ce il Rome. At this infiant two armed men came
up to the bed of ifate, which had been brought down
into the Forum, and fee fire to it. In order to form
pile, the mob put in practice the fame thing they

B b4 had

A.R. 7S. had done nine years before in relation to Clodius,
Ant. C. and pulled up the feats of the judges, the counters of

the bankers and shop-keepers, and in aword what
ever wood they could lay their hands on. They then
flung into the fire the gifts and offerings, and all the
pompous decorations of the funeral. The soldiers
also cast in their arms, and ome of them their crowns,
or other military honours. The very ladies could not
refuse to sacrifice their ornaments to Cafar, and they
made their children to do the fame. By this time the
fame became so violent as to reach the houfeofa
person of diftincion, named L. Bellienus, which was
thereby consumed: and several other both sacred and
profane buildings had run the fame risk, had not the
Consuls prevented it by a proper distribution of troops
in the Forum.

Nor was this all. Several were exasperated tomad.
ness, and with firebrands in their hands ran to the
Conspirators houses, in order to burn them. But as
they were prepared to receive them, they thought
proper to retire, threatening to return the nextay
with proper arms.

This furious zeal, which animated the populac
against Cefar's Murtherers, proved fatal to one of hi
friends. Helvius Cinna, that Tribune whom I ha
twice had occasion to mention, came but late to the
ceremony, having been deterred by a dream he had
had the preceding night, and which had even give
him a feverish disorder. He thought he saw Csfa
mwho invited him to supper, and upon his refufa
seized him by the hand and dragged him into a
abyss. Notwithstanding this dream had had aviolcn
efifct en his mind as well as body, yet he was deter
mined not to fail paying his last devoirs to Cafar. 0
his arrival, unluckily somebody called him by hi
firname of Cinna. Which being heard by some wh
did not know him, they mifook him for the Pra:to
Cornelius Cinna, who ome few days before hadde
claimed indecently against the Diaator's memory
1-c was immediately surrounded and seized, and not

withftandin

withiftanding his protestations that he had no otherA. R. os'
conne&ion with Cornelius Cinna than the name, he tC.
was pulled to pieces on the spot.
Such were the effe&s of the funeral oration pro-
nounced by Anthony in honour of Caesar; with
which he might have been satisfied, if he had no
other motive than to revenge the death of his friend
and benefactor. But as doubtless his own interest was
what most nearly concerned him, perceiving that he
had thereby incurred the Senate's displeasure, he re-
solved to regain that powerful assembly, whose assist-
ance he had still great need of. For which purpose he
did several as which declared him a zealous Repub-
lican, and seemed for tome time to have forgot Cafar,
and to be entirely taken up in contriving his country's
good, and in the support of liberty and the tranquil-
lily of the public. The following instances most re-
markably evince this his new plan of condu&.
I have mentioned that Cafar's papers and memo-
randums were in Anthony's poffeflion. As he had
not delivered in any inventory of them, it was in his
power to procure the paling of any at of his own
contrivance, under the Dictator's authority; and the
law would have supported him, as Ca far's as had
been confirmed by a decree of the Senate. By this
reans the Consul was empowered to grant whatever
privileges, immunities, or rewards he thought pro-
per, either to towns, or to particular persons. It is
rue, he in process of time carried this abuse to the ut-
molf excess: but at this time, whether to prevent
any apprehensions of this kind, or to make a thew of
his attention to the public good, he insisted, at the
request of Ser. Sulpicius, that a decree hould pals,
importing that from the ides of March, no ordinance
hould be published in Caesar's name, for granting
either exemption or privilege to any one whatever.
This first ftep was highly plealing to all who had
any regard for good order and the laws. Anthony
took a second, which seemed to prove an uncommon
attention to the liberty of the Republic this was

the

A.t. 7p.. the abolition of the Diatotip. He rIrtved th(
At .- hlonour of this aibnr entifiely to hiffifelf. Sot he dic

not propose the affair, as had been cuftbRoiary, to the
Senate's deliberation, but he brought the decree With
him ready drawn up, whereby the title and oe bt61
Dictator was for ever abolilhed, with iprecatirns
against any 6ne who should atterpt to revive it, nd
a power for any citizen to attack and kill himi with
impunity. This, as may be perceived, as indi
re&ly caftiig a slur on Caesar's memory, ahd obt'only
establishing and confirming the present liberty, bu
securing it against any futute attempts.

At the fame time he was no less serviceable to the
Senators, in suppressing, by a bold troke, a seditious
mob, which might have proved fatal to them. The
Dictator's ashes having been collected by his freed.
men and deposited in the sepulchre of his ancefiors,
the people erected an altar on the place where his
corpse had been burnt; and near the altar, a marbl
pillar twenty foot high, with this inscription: Pathi
Patrie. There public worship was paid to Cefar:
vows and oaths were confirmed by a solemn invoca,
tion of his name: and libations and sacrifices were
there offered.

The mob which daily aTembled in this place, wa!
so much the more formidable, as it was headed by
man of a daring spirit, who for some years had endea-
voured to be taken notice of, and to raise himielf, bj
a gross imposture, above his fortune. He was o
mean parentage, and named Amatius: but from the
fefemblance of the name, he pretended to be the fa
fous Marius's grandson, and son of him whowa
slain at Prenefte, and had been made Consul whei
he was but twenty years old. Consequently he claim
ed a relationship to the Caifars: and even during te
Dictator's life-ti-c he had been hardy enough t,
broach his falsity, and cunning enough to makei
succeed to a certain point. Insomuch that ome ladies
related to Cfar, acknowledged him; and he ha
already gained a great number of partisans. Ti

hap

cend whIh Caffar was engaged in the lafR Spahlh A. 70'
ar. 44.
Amatiu a tht tirnie put young Osavius's pru- Nic. Da-
dtae to ah hazardous trial. Being informed that this tnafc. de

Inftit.
avourite nephew of the Dicator was coming to Aug.
Rome, he went as far as the Janicuium to nleet him,
attended by all his followers, and demanded to be
treated and acknowledged as a relation. O&avius
was rot a little embarrassed. He knew the impof-
ture, and was cautious not to authorile it by any at
which might seem an acknowledgment from him. On
the other hand, there might be some hazard in deny-
ing a mah so well attended. He therefore wifely chose
a edium: " Cfar, said he to the impostor, is the
"head of our family, as well as of the Empire. You
; therefore should apply to him, if you would be ac-
" knowledged as a relation. His decision will be an
,' absolute order to me, to which I mhall submit with-
out hesitation."
When Cfar returned to Rome, Amatius, so far Val. Max.
from concealing himself, had the insolence in some L. Is
mealure to vie with him: and when the Difator per-
mitted the people to come and compliment him in
his gardens, this wretch placed himself under an ad-
iacent arcade, where he had almost as numerous a
court.
Caesar soon put an end to this farce. He enquired
into the history of this man, and being informed he
was nothing better than a farrier, banished him Italy.
After Cfar's death, Amatius appeared again in
Rome: he renewed his practices with the mob; and
pretending a zeal to avenge Cefar's death, he began
already to threaten his 1/urtherers, and even all the
Senators, whom he flung into the utmost confterna-
tion. Anthony delivered them from this clanger.
The pretended Marius was seized by his order, and
strangled in prison. This military execution was mat-
ter of astonishment to the Senate: but the benefit
ariing to them from thence, effaced the irregularity
of the proceeding.

'Ie

A. R. 70. The commendations bestowed on Anthony on tiis
Ant. C.

44'_ occasion induced Dolabella to compleat what his col-

legue had begun. For Amatius's death had not en-
tirely restored peace to the City. The populace,
though deprived of their chief, did not forbear pub-
lickly to pay religious homage to Caesar's memory.
Dolabella was determined to cut this evil to the quick:
he overturned the altar and pillar, dispersed the mul-
titude, and having seized the most mutinous, he
caused all who had the freedom of the city to be flung
down the Tarpeian Rock, and ordered the saves to
be crucified. In this manner he hared with Anthony
the approbation of the Senate; and this his exploit
ic. ad was particularly celebrated by Cicero, his former fa.
7. ther-in-law.

The lail proof of Anthony's complaisance to the
Senate, at the time which immediately succeeded Ce-
far's death, was the readiness with which he con-
sented to the re-establishment of Sextus Pompeius,
v.hole name was infinitely dear to almost all who then
composed that affenmbly. This unfortunate heir of
so illustrious a family did not wait his enemy's death
ere he attempted omething towards the re-establish-
ment of his fortune. After having led for some ti:e
a vagabond life, as I have mentioned, in the moun-
tains of Celtiberia, he made it his application to as-
fe.ole the Scatrered remains of the battle of Munda;
and having also colle&ed some other forces, he no
longer kept himself concealed, but even ventured to
seize several towns in the open country; and not-
withstanding he was successively attacked by two of
Cafar's Lieutenants, Carrinas and the famous Pollio,
he made shift to defend himself against them both,
and with ome advantage. Already his affairs were
in a tolerable situation, when he received advice that
the Dicator had been killed in the Senate. This
news encreafed his hopes, and strengthened his party:
and he made no scruple to write to Rome, desiring
leave to return into his native country, and to be re-
stored to his poffefions; and that all the troops might

be

be disbanded throughout the Empire. Anthony fef R. 7o9.
conded his pretensions: except that instead of restoring Ant. C.
him his patrimony, a great part of which he himself Cic. ad
was either in poffeRion of, or had squandered, heAtt. XV.
proposed giving him two hundred millions of Sefter- I .6oo.
ces out of the public Treasury, and moreover to ap-
point him Comnnodore of the seas, as his father had
formerly been( Nothing could be more agreeable to
the Senate, Anfd yet, for some unknown reason, the veil. .
affair remaned in fufpence, nor was concluded till79.
some months after by Lepidus's means, who as Pro-
consul of Citerior-Spain, was naturally charged with
this negotiation' They granted Sextus all the terms
proposed by Afony, and even morel For the
quivalent allowed him for his patrimony-aimounted
tofeven hundred millions of Sesterces: an immense .5467so0.
im, which plainly hewed that the Senate's intention cic. Phil.
was to arm the-Jon of Pompey, and not simply to in-
demnify him, Sextus thereupon quitted Spain, but
did not returni-t Rome! He made use of his title of
Commodore or Supcr-iite'rndant of the seas, for the
alTembling all the vessels he could meet with in the
ports of Spain and France, on the Mediterranean fide
and he remained some time at Marseilles to fee what
turn affairs would take. When he saw the Trium-
irate forming, he feized'on Sicily, where, as we
hall hereafter observe, the outlaws found the safest
fylum.

return to Anthony, who assumed an aristocratic
and republican zeal, but who oon made it appear
Fat he had no other interest than to satisfy his am-
bition. By all the acions I have just given an account
of, in proportion as he ingratiated himself with the
Senate, he forfeited the esteem of a great part of the
multitude, who still preserved an attachment and even
veneration for Cas;ar's memory. This served Anthony
a pretence to be apprehensive of some insult, and to
apply for a guard to protect his person: which the
Senate had no boner granted him, than they had
'.use to repent it. For the Consul, initead-of a

guard,

A. R. 7. guard, formed a little army, amounting to about a
A~C thous'nd men, which he picked out of the voters,

and put under the command of experienced officers.
So that under pretence of freeing himself from an
inquietude, which was litle more than chimeriai,
he became a real uneasiness to the too credulol' Se-
nators.
Cic. Phil. A: the fame time he gained creatures, an4 railed
u. 9, 9. im-mense fums by means f forged as which he ut,

tered in Cafar's name. And not regarjipg the de-
crees which he himself had prqcured On tlhi accoQt,
he every day produced an infinity of prerended ordi-
nances of Celar, which granted mmpurties, four
and privileges of all kinds; which conferred tb;
right of Roman citizens, not only on particular p
sons, but on whole cities which alienated th publ
revenue; which recalled several who were in exile
in a word, which decreed whatever Kings, Stae
Citizens, or Strangers could obtain from 4Ahon
through their credit, or could purch4e with he
money. And on this occafiQn he loft all sens o
shame. For having at his command one of Cfar'
Secretaries named Faberius, who had been uedt
counter-sign thele kinds of as, he only inform
him.inlf what profits were likely to arise from the let
ters which were applied for: and the irppofprew
sometimes so gross, that Cafar was therein imade
speak of events which actually happened after h
death. However, this kind of fraud was t him
Piut. An- mine of gold. And there * was nothing that Anthon
Cic. Pil was not ready to fell, provided a buyer offered. S
l. 93. that at his house money went not by tale, but b

weight. If therefore you add one hundred million
of Sesterces which Calphurnia paid him immediatel
after Caesar's death, and seven hundred millions whic
the Dictator had deposited in the Temple of th
' Nemo ullius rei suit emptor, cui defuerit hic venditor. Ci
Phil. II. n 97.

Tanti acervi nummorum apud ifum conftruuntur, ut jam appI
4nanur, non numerentur pecunie. Id. ibid.

God
7

Goddess Ops, and which Anthony seied,: fonm idea4 ..
may be formed of his riches; agd conqtqurenly what .;.*
a power he had to fucced in whatever he pleiaed to
attempt. He was, bfides fpparted by his two bro-
hers, one of wh4o was Praetor, ad the ther Ti-
bune: and he had gained Lepidus, by prpturirqg D
him the office of Poitifex Maximus in the ronm 9f
Cfar.
When he had well taken his measures, he refolvqd
to attack Brutus and Cassius, to whom he had till then
paid a very great regrd, These twp Chefs of the
Conspiracy had always been favorites with the Seate;
bt having never purfuqi any indire&: measures, and
depending on the prote&ion f the laws, they had
taken no care to provide themselves with either troops
or money. Some indeed of their friends thought to
raise them a ind of military chest, from a voluntary
affefflmeir f the Romarn nights. The thing wa
proppfed to Aticus, who on ceount of hi riche,
cxdit, and intimacy with the principal persons in the
Republic, might inconteltably be reckoned i the first
rank of the Knights. Besides, he had alays been a
aunch friend to Brutus, and a strong Rpubian.
However, he refused entering into the fcheaie, con-
tenting himself with perfonalsv offering to Bruius al
that he was worth, but said he was determined to avoid
all appearance of faftion and cabal: a very insufficient
reason under such. a government and in such times as
he then lived. Upon Atticus's refusal the affair dropt,
and the Conspirators thereby became confiderab-e
sufferers.
Cornelius Nepos., the author who mentions this
fa&, here takes an opportunity of bestowing great
encomiums on Atticus's prudence and discretion.
But the exceflive admiration with which his hero
seems on all occalions to affelt him, greatly detracs
from his judgment. For my own part, I fee no .c-
lion throughout Atticus's life which lays him more
open to censure, or can better authorise the suspicions
tf a celebrated modern writer, who would have him

conr-

A.R-74. confidered as a man entirely taken up with his owr

c. interest, who kept well with all parries, and had nc

affetion for any. However, I do not pretend tc
condemn Atticus, nor to have the fame sentiments of
him as the Abbe de S. Ral. Perhaps Corn. Nepos
has not so thoroughly explained the circumtances of
the fa& in dispute, as to enable us to form a true
judgment of it. He is certainly an elegant writer,
but far from being an extraordinary genius: and i
abridging the facts, it may often have happened tha
he has retrenched more than he intended.

Be it how it will, Brutus and Callius, who had no
forces they could immediately make use of, saw with
regret the progress of Anthony's power, and wer
jealous of his intentions. They were also not a little
alarmed at the great number of Caesar's veterans,
which came to Rome from all parts. They therefor
thought themselves under a necessity of putting their
party in a tate of defence: and as three of their afl-o
ciates had provinces assigned them, and no obje&ion
could be made to their going immediately to tak
possession of them; to wit, D. Brutus of Cifalpin
Gaul, Trebonius of Asia properly so called, and Ti
lius Cimber of Bithynia; they persuaded them to fe
out with all expedition, at the fame time recommend-
ing it to them to make a sufficient provision of men
and money.
Cic. Phi. But they were extremely embarrassed in relation to
. 3;.'* themselves. For being. at that time Pretors, the

were obliged to reside in Rome, particularly Brutus
who had the city-quarter under his jurifdi&ion, an
therefore could not be absent above ten days together.
The Governments of Macedonia and Syria had been
assigned them, but not till after the expiration of their
Magistracy. So that.nothing could exceed their per-
plexity. If they staid in Rome, their lives were ex

* Appian supposes them already set out, and fays that Brutus and
Caflius wrote to them. But the subsequent fats, and the authority
Cicero with refpeft to Trebonius in particular (XIV. ad Att. ,o)
have induced me to tell the story different.

g posed

posed to the resentment of Csefar's soldiers. And on A.R.es.
the other hand, it would be indecent, and irregular Ant' c.
in them to quit it. However, they fixed on the lat-
ter. Anthony justified the irregularity, by procuring
Brutus a dispensation from the people for non-refi-
dence: and the Senate endeavoured to obviate any
reflexions that might be made -on their departure, or
rather their flight, by giving them a commifion to
raise, in Sicily and Asia, the provisions of corn necef-
fary for the city.
They had scarcely quitted Rome before Anthony
unmarked, and undertook to strip them of their go-
vernments. As they were upon all accounts the two
best in the empire; he therein found a double ad-
vantage, in taking them from his adversaries, and in
bestowing them according to his inclinations. How-
ever, he did not care to set out by asing direcly for
himself, and he persuaded his Collegue to ak for
Syria, which had been assigned to Caflius. On the
Senate's refusal, Dolabella, who expected no less, had
recourse to the people: and with Anthony's assistance,
who by virtue of his authority silenced a Tribune of
the contrary party, carried his point. This first ftep
gained, emboldened Anthony, who by the fame means
procured the province of Macedonia for himself.
However, not to break through all measures with
men of such consequence as Brutus and Calius, he
consented that the Senate Ihould grant them, by way
of indemnification, to the one Cirene, and to the
oher the ife of Crete; which provinces were by no
means an equivalent for those which had been taken
from them.
In this manner Anthony made known his inten-
tons, and endeavoured, by destroying the Republi-
tan party, to raise himself. It is plain his hopes were
to succeed Cafar: and perhaps he might have carried
/is point, if he had not been interrupted.by a rival,
Who, though he was not near equal to him in year,
t far exceeded him in experience. t is plain I
Ican O&avius, who happened to be absent from
VOL. IX. C c Rome

.R. 7o. Rome at the time of his uncle's death, but was no
Aa C. sooner informed of it than he let forward with all ex-
4* . pedition. His arrival is a very important Era, as it

still more embroiled affairs, increased fa&ions, and
confounded interests. The matter is copious, but
from the multiplicity of fa&s, must cost an author
some pains to avoid confusion: however, I shall en-
deavour to be as little obscure as pofible.

TH

*{ 387 :3
- .
''. - ,i

T H E-
THE
ROMAN HISTORY.

BOOK THE FORTY-SEVENTH.
O CTAVIUS, adopted by Caesar's will,

begins to interfere in affairs, and de-
clares for the Senate in opposition to
Anthony. Brutus and Cassius acquire great
forces in the provinces. The war of Modena.
Anthony's fall and rife. Anno Rome 708, 709.

SECT. I.
Te Confpiratprs imprudent condul the cauje of Anthony's
rife. Otavius comes and forms a party. From.Apol-
lonia, where be firJi heard of his Uncle's death, he
tomes into Italy and takes the name of Cxfar. He
tries his kill, by deceiving Cicero, who joins him. His
Motber is not able to prevail on him to renounce thefuc-
cecfin to Cefar. His firfi interview with Anthony,
wbho receives him very ill. He wants to be made Trii-
kune of the people: but Anthony prevents it. le gains
the multitude by his liberality, and by the feaiss be
gives them. Comet during Oavius's sports. He
fIlls all his inheritance from Ca'far. Diffculties Jarted
b the Consul. Their falling out and reconciliation.

C c 2 ORavius

Ot7avins is ccufed by Antbony of an attempt to bave
him ffa.ffnated. Tey take arms. AntbhoyClsf or
the Macedonian legions into' T1f'.a4'At^'J
popular. Otfavius gains bis Fatber's eiirans. u.
tus and Cassius quit' Italy a'd go'byondfea. Pcrcia
and Brutus's frparation. Cicero fits' t on a vyage to
Greece:' But changes his mind and retthits to Rome.
Cicero's firlf Pbilippic. His second Philippic. 'Jn.
tbcny being come to Brundufwm ofends the fdi&r by
bis fcverity. He arrives at Rome with the legion called
the Larks. He btere lrikes a terror. f'roops alem-
bled by Otavius. He isforfaken by the greatft part
of them. He recovers them by bis pritdence and mild.
nes. Two of Antbony's legions come over to Olaiviw.
Anthony leaves Rome, and undertakes to make imfilf
malfer of Cisalpine Gaul, which D. Brutus was inpof-
feffon of. hbe forces f Antbony, of Deimus, and of
Ota v.ius. Oavius tenders bis service to the Snrate
agair.t Antbony. ThIy accept his ofer. Cicero's l
engagements with Oavius. A d:cree of the Senate
whsich autborifes Decimus and Oteavius's military pre-
parations. Anthony befirges Decimus in Mdna. State
es the Republican party in Italy. Brutus and Caus
go to Athens. Brutus engages the young Roman fludois
into his service, among others Cicero's Jon and the Poet
Horace. He in aJlort time raises a powerful army, a
makes him/elf master of Greece, of Macedouia and te
adjacent countries. Cassius goes into Syria, wvilf Do
labella flops in /fia Minor, whereee puts Trebonius t
death. Cafius makes bimfelf mafier of Syria and q
twel-e legions. He is cmmifioned by the Serate t
carry cn tbe war with Do!abella, whom he reduces t
sech fireights that be kills him/elf. The borfe Sfjam
State cf al he Roman armies. if'e difpofions of bei
Commanders. Paleness of the Sun during tbhe weh
year of Caffr's death. Servilius Ifauricus's death.
remarkcble inance of l'is gravity.

TH

rTuiHE rpid £dwmc ment of Anthony, who at the A. .ol.
1 inftan of Casr's death had appeared so terri- Ant. C
fed and difconcertd, and in the lpace of a few weeks
had attained the head of affairs, ad reduced the
Chiefs of the Republican party to the neceflity of
quitting Rome, was entirely owing to the imprudent
condut of the Conspirators. They were satisfied
with having taken very right measures for killing
Cafar, but had made no preparations for the necef
fary consequentes of so extraordinary an event. In-
fonluch that. every fresh incident embarrassed them,
and they were often as it were forced to chufe the
worst fide. So that though they had subverted the
modern form of Government, yet they had done no-
thing towards eftablithing the ancient one, " * The
Tyrant is dead,:, said Cicero, and yet we are not
free. Our Heroes have done Mnuch-to their own
honour, but nothing for their country, or for- us.
0 what a glorious exploit, but unfortunately left
imperfe&" '
Nay further; the confirmation of Caesar's acts, to
which they had given their consent, made his autho-
rity fubfif even.after his death. Cicero was not a
little concerned at this. " Good t Gods! cries he,
the Tyrant is dead, and yet Tyranny flourishes.
We could, not endure him for a master, and yet
we refpe& as. laws, all the papers that are found at
his house, after his death. We muff submit to be
alked, What! dare you oppose Cafar's will ? and
wherever we go, we are continually reminded not
only of his orders, but of his minutess thoughts."

Interfeto reeg liberi non fumus. Noffi stic quod per ipsos con-
"d potuit gloriofiffim, & magnificentiffim; confecerunt: reliqua res
ts & copias defiderant, quas nullas habemus. Illi quoquomodo
9ati, civitas mifera. 1i rplb at dics irt, dra'rc i;. Cc« ad Att.
XIV. 11.4. 5. - 1.
t 0 Dii boni ! vivit tyrannis, ty'anius occidit! Cui fervire ipfi non
iltuimus, cjus libellis paremus. Ut audeant dicere, " Tu ne contra
Claris nutum !" Quacunque nos commovimus, ad Cfaris non
odlo afta, fed cogitata revocamur. Cc, ad Att. XIV. 9.14,o. iz,

Cc 3 An-

A. R.7o. Anthony, as we have found, misapplied Caesar's name

Ant c for a infinite numberof ti ~gs. bic ibe
l t.I0

never so much as toghto ,.mt would ot he
done, if he had lied- It is tf foe wh
thb (icero fnrues not to faythdt "Y dbemabigen
of the Cofpiracy had the heart:s * man and thtun.
derfanding of a child." .. .
'

He lays the whole t blam on Brutus, for-:tihg
Anthony live,. who might hve been keatlt e
fame time as Cefar. Who knowsv not tht rca~ .
able exprefflon of his in two of his letters;, aeito
Trebonius, the other to Cafli: " 1 wi.flil- ad beaf
Z invited to that exqpifite repaf of the Idcsof lmrth!
there should have been no leavings." But befies
that justice and humanity on this occasion defend Dru-
tus's conduEt, Anthony had not yet discovered him-
self: and § Cicero himself at first confidcred hinmf a-
rher as a person capable of diretinga banquet, un
f' ferming any pernicious projefat. Brutfs's ul
wa4 io imagining all the world to be animated with
the fame sentiments as himself against Cfai ad'in
the bhal of liberty: without recolle~ig, thtt the
people for a long time had been accuifomed to seI
themselves to the highest bidder; that tht fediry
were attached to Cfar, through gratitude, admira
tion, and interest; and that the Sceate itflf, though
the most uneasy with its subjection, and more bnefited
by a Republican government than any other body of
the state, contained a great number of avariciou per-
sons, whose concern for the public good was aborbed
by the hopes of making their fortunes, and agg~adi-
sing themkflves.

Brutus thought he had to do with those ancient
Remans, zealous for liberty, and ready to facriicc

Afa i!!a res eft anirno virili, confilio puerili. 14. ibid. si.
- Hc omnis culpa Bruti. Cic. ad Att. XV. 2o.
t Quam vellem ad illas pulcerrinas epulas me Idibus Marilt in-
ltafies ! reliqiarum nihil haberemus. Cic. ad Far., X. t. Y,
xn. 4.

f Antonium ego epularum magis arbitror rationem hab", qS
qudquam mali cogitare. Cc. ad Att. XIV, 5.

themselves to serve their country. He persuaded A. R- o
bimfelf that as oon as Cafar was dispatched, the atC
machine of Government if I may so expref» myfelfl,
would Work:again Of itself, when the ob~ clc which
impeded its hmotion was removed. This was bag
etremely ignorant of the time he lived in, and of
the men ihe had to do with, and consequently being
deficient in that part of knowledg the mops efferitial
to the manager of any important eaterprife. Hd
ought to have hid forces to compleatt the eeoution
of his projec. This was Cicero's dpinion, and to
confirm it he appeals to Brutus himself in a letter
wrote long after. "' The * moment after the etecu-
tion, fays he to him, you only thought of peace;
which could not poliibly be procured by any negotia.
tion: I only thought of liberty, which it is true can.
not subsist withopt peace; but it was always my opi~
nion that the work of peace could not pofibly be cf
feded but by a war." Had Brutus followed this ad-
vice; had he, on the one hand, taken the advantage
of the consternation Cefar's death had flung all his
friends into; and on the other, had he made a pio
per use of the zeal of a great number of citizens;
who were ready to take up arms in favour of Romis
Deliverers, he might have restored the ancient Re-/
public, at least for a time. But for want of being
convinced of the necessity of having recourse to that
only method, he fuffired Anthony to becomeformi-.
dable, and gave young Otavius an opportunity of
flipping between them, to destroy them both, arit
reap the whole advantage of the revolution.
Nobody would have. thought that a young man,
sho was not quite nineteen years old, could have
made so extraordinary a figure, on the grandest fiagei
and in the most important affair, that time ever pro-'
cuced. But to audacity and ambition, no. unusual;
* Recenti illotempore tu. onnia ad pacem, quae oratione confioi
aM poterat: ego orinia ad libertatem, qu fine pace nulla eft; p.
tmn ipfam bell aue anrti en-ici poffi astrait, Cic. ad Br't.

C c 4 qua-

AR. o. qualities in persons of his age, O&avius added a pru.
At. C dence, or rather a cunning, which exceeded the.poli.

tical experience of the oldest men.
Suet.Aug. He had been for some months at Apollonia in
p;.& 19. Epirus, at the time his uncle was killed, and was
Plut Brut. r
.
Appian. waiting his coming there, in order to accompany his
Civil I.. in the Parthian war, in quality of General of th
DXl°v. horse. However, the time he remained there was not

lot. He employed it in compleating his exercises
both of body and mind, and particularly in 'the study
of eloquence; for which purpose hehad brought with
him a celebrated master, Apollodorus of Pergams.
For he was thoroughly sensible of the advantage of
the talent of speech: he had consecrated to it the
first-fruits of his youth, by pronouncing, when Ae
was but twelve years old, from the Rostra, the fu.
neral oration of his grand-mother Julia, Caesar's si.
ter: and he cultivated it to the last, in the greatef
exigency of affairs, and even in the midst of war and
tumult.

The news of the Ditator's death surprised and as.
flited him, but he shewed no unseemly grief or d.
fpondency. He did not imagine his hopes ruined;
and he only deliberated on the method of pushing his
fortune by himself, now he had loft his support
When the officers of his legions quartered about Apol.
wVdnU. lonia came to offer him their ervices, Agrippa and

Salvidienus, who even then espoused his interest, ad.
vised him to take advantage of the good disposition
of the troops. But he judged, with reason, that il
would be too ralh and precipitate a ftep, to put him.
self at the head of an army, without any right ol
commanding; without any, the least apparent, titde;
or without knowing the Rate of affairs, or being ac.
quainted with the dispositions of either the people
the Senate, or any of the leading men in the Republic
He thought he had better go to Rome, as to the
fountain-head, where he might regulate his own con-
dut by the variation in circjmftances, and might fc
far be supported by public authority, which there re

fided

ided as in its center, as to give an air of fanion to A.I. 7a.
iisenterprizes. 44.
The method he proposed to take, and the motive
he intended to proceed on, was the avenging his
uncle's death: which indeed was the most specious
pretence under which he could conceal his ambition,
and at-the fame time an easy and certain means of
procuring partisans and creatures, especially among
he soldiery. I do not assert that it was mere hypo-
crify on his part. An inclination to vengeance, as he
was circumstanced, is natural enough, not to be sus-
peted of artifice. I only mean to fay, that his prin-
cipal end was, if poflible, to succeed Caesar; and
that the spirit of revenge held only the second place in
his designs. However, he affe&ed to be atuated by
no other motive: though even that he concealed at
frt; and he pursued his plan, not with the warmth
of a young man, but with all the phlegm and matu-
rty of the most cunning politician; patiently wait-
ing for an opportunity to discover himself, and even
sometimes outwardly deviating from his system, in
order to return by an indirect, but more certain,
route.
No sooner was he come into Italy than he was in-
formed of Cefar's will, and of hie adoption: where-
upon he aflumed the names of his adoptive father,
snd was called C. JULIUS CIESAR OCTAVIAN u. This
was contracting an engagement, which put it out of
his power to follow the timid advice of his mother
Atia, and of Marcius Philippus his father-in-law; who
had wrote to him, advising him to confine himself to
private quiet life, and to beware of a similar fate to
his great uncle, whom all his vitories could not ex-
empt from an unhappy death. But Octavius only
Cnfulted his own courage, and he had an immediate
reason to be satisfied with the measures he pursued.
The legions which were at Brundufium did not wait
his coming, but went out to meet him: all the vete-
rans, to whom the Ditator had given settlements ti-
her in the country, or in the municipal towns, came

and

A. R- 7. and joined young Cagfar: and he marched tward

44C' Rome, attended by a numerous army, which aug.

mented every instant.

All thee warriors breathed nothing but vygeac
and complained bitterly of Anthony,. who in their
opinion was much too mild with the MurEhieaws
Young Cafar, whom I mhall more frequently cal
O&avius, was of their opinion: but perceivig thd
the Senate was inclined to protet the reftor of i.
berry, and apprehending a rival in his own pary,
from Anthony himself, whose age, experience, ad
known bravery, supported by the consular. power,
gave him a great superiority over him, he determine
to dissemble: and whillf, on the one haad, he en.
couraged the hopes and desires of his militiryparti
fans; on the other hand, kept fair with the Republi-
cans, as a trial of his kill, he deceived Cicero.
c:c. ad This sublime genius, but whose courage could not
Atic. 1. support him in adversity, was at that time in a condi
uxv* tion not unlike despondency. He had only staid in

Rome some few days after Caesar's death. Fora
soon as he perceived that affairs were like to take an
ill turn; that Anthony made a great progress to.
wards tyranny; and that the Conspirators every m
ment loft ground, he retired into the country, an
dividing his time between his different country-houfes,
gave a scope to his melancholy refle&ions on the pre
sent occurrences, and seemed wholly employed inpro
viding for his own particular safety, because he almo
despaired of that of the Republic.

As nothing escaped his attention, he could net fai
observing Oaavius's arrival in Italy: and he mention
it in a letter to Atticus, dated the th of April. A
. .' few days after, being near Cumae, this youngm

came into his neighbourhood, to the house of Mar
cius Philippus, his father-in-law: and as soon as h
arrived, before he had seen Cicero, he ent him h
compliments fignifving the esteem and regard heha
for him. This was succeeded by a visit, to which
Marcius introduced him. It does not appear that any

thiung

ig very considerable passed at this first inter view, .s-
icero only informs us,, that his attendants gave him ^.
e title of Caesar, but that his-fither-inlaw did not
&d that for that reason he also omitted it: "1 And
}I do not think, adds he, that any-good citizen
ould have done otherwise." But he~ afterwardt
rngely changed his tile. O&avius, who immedi-
ely fet-outfor Roihe, improved this new commenced
iiliarityby frequent letters: wherein he paid great
Ourt to Cicero, Rfiled him his father, and declared
tathe would not but by his advice. He by this
nethod in a hort time drew him in to have a good
pinion of him. '' Otiviist, fays he, wants nei-
hr for sense, nor courage: and I hope that he wilt
have, with refpe&f.of our heroes (by which epithet
i implies Brutus aid Cassius) the very sentiments
we defre." However, he did not absolutely confide
i him. His age, the name he had taken, the qua-
ty of Cefar's heir, and the inftru&ions he was likely
o receive from his associates, all served to give. um
rhge to Cicero. Yet he concludes, that he mu be
Lpported, if it be only to separate him from An-
thony.
And in effec, the necefflty of opposing Anthony
ws the principal inducement for their union: For as
ke Consul made it hissbufinefs, as we shall find here-
ifter, to embarrass them both as much s possible;
iey thought it necessary to write against the common Plut. Cic.
temy. Oavius had need of Cicero's weight and
athority in the Senate: and on the othet hand, Ci-
cero could not support his credit with the soldiery,
without the assistance of OAavius. This therefore was
ie foundation of that ftri& alliance between them,
'Nobifcum h perhonorifice & amice O&avins: quem quidem si
Warem falutabant, Pbilippus non: itaque ne nos quidem: quem
r0o polfe bonum civem. Cc. ad Att. XIV. lz.
t O&aviano, ut perfpexi, satis ingenii, satis animi: videbaturque
lga noftros ;~,a ita fore ut nos vellemus animatus. Sed quid' ati
dendum fit, quid nomini, quid hreditati, quid x mX'nig, magni
i:tlii ell.-Sed tamen alendus et; & ; utni aliud, ab Anontio
itn^gendub, Cc, ad Att, XV. Iw.

which

A.R. toS. which has been so often and so jufly refleted on i

~ C-c an old consummate politician, who fuffcred himsel

to be duped by a child.
Aua. de This union was in its infancy, when Oaavius cam
cauf. cor. to Rome, "ad found that Anthony was ani be
A:.P i come absolute. However, before he took any ea
Nic De- fures to claim his inheritance, or to obtain a publi
·as. de order to authorise his adoption, he had a feli di
Aug. culty to struggle with, in relation to his mother Aia

who, besides her natural authority, merited
greatesl regard from her son, on account of the pa
ticular care fle had taken of his education. This lady
in conjunction with her huband Marcius Philipp
and her fon-in-law Marcellus, most earnestly intreat
her son to renounce a fuccefion and tite, which ex
posed him to the resentment of the Republican party
to Anthony's jealousy, and to a thousand other haard
All these representations were ineffectual. The youn
man kept constant to his principles, and geerou
' declared that he could never eiteem himself unwi
thv a title, which Cafar had not disdained corfce
on him. And all the compliance he hewed his
rher, was to promise to aat witfi great circumfpeion
therein he kept his word.
AppiAn. The morning after his arrival, he attended C: A
Dio. tonius, who in Brutus's ablende discharged the ofic

of Pretor of the city: and made a formal demand
being put in pofeffion of his inheritance from Czfa
From thence, though the Consul Anthony had n
tfewn him the least ci-'iitv, not having even conde
:iended to fend him his compliments on his arriva
Otavius vwent to Pompey's gardens, to pay him th
rirft visit, favina.that it vas. but reasonable that h
who was oung and in no public character, floul
make some advances to a person who so far furpaf

Diaitans nefas effe, quo nornie Cxari dignus effe vifus, * si
ipfum videri indignum. VELL. II. G0.
* All the edition! havc Stmeticfum; but it is an spparnt tkc

lin

him in years, and was invested with the principal of- AR. it.
ice in the Republic. Ant. C'
Anthony had a double -interest to oppose Oavi.
n's progress, and to keep him under first, a lucra.
tie one; for as he had seized all the ready money
Cefar had at his death, either in 'his house, or at his
disposal, and flill continued to appropriate different
arts of his estates as they best suited his convenience,
he had reason to apprehend he hould be called toan
ccount by'Cfar s heir: in the next place, his ambi-
ion was no less concerned; because a son of Cefar
might become a dangerous rival, and dispute with
him the supreme command, which was what he aimed
t. At the fame time that he feared him in there plut.
two points of view, he no less defpiled him on ac- Anton.
count'of his youth. Insomuch that he did not treat
him with common civility, but made him wait a con-
iderable time before he admitted him to an audience:
ad when Oftavius very frankly. desired him to pay
im the fums arising from Cfar's fucceflion, which
e had received, and without which he was not able
todifcharge the legacies bequeathed by his uncle and
adoptive, father's will&Anthony made a jest of his
ropofal; and by way friendly advice told him, he
hnew not the consequence of declaring himself Cafar's
heir; and that a man so young as he, could not have
ffiucient experience or friends for such an under-
taking. To this refusal, Anthony soon after added a fresh
insult. There was a form necessary for compleating
the adoption: which must be ratified in a full as-
kmbly of the Tribes. The Consul could not re-
ife his assistance in aflembling the Tribes, and pro-
pling the law. But, though it was merely a matter
fs course, he procured some Tribunes to oppose it,
nd the affair failed, under pretence of its being
pottponed. Odavius, exasperated at a treatment which he
iooked upon as the highest ingratitude in a friend and
creature of his father, only became more zealous in

the

A u7os. the pursuit of his interest: and findin g nflfi con

*c ftcantly opposed by the very person from w4hm I

might have expected aifance, had recourfeio.th
Senate and. people. He soon gained the Senate' ha
vour, by Cicero's especial afiftance, as I have a]
ready mentioned, and which I shall have occafio
Suet.Aug. hereafter more particularly to relate. And in orde
D.o. to have some weight with the people, he would hay

been glad to have had some rank: and as the offic1
of Tribune was vacant, by the death of Hilviu
Cinna, iain on the day of Caesar's funeral, he had;
mind to put up for it, and thought he had an oppor
tunity which he ought not to let flip. Although Pa
trician born, and much under the age requisite so
being a Senator, he made private application for the
office, aad was therein seconded by T. Canutius, one
of the Tribunes. But Anthony herein again oppofc
his designs, and prevented his succeeding. Oaviuo
now found he had no other method left to becomi
popular, than by hewing his liberality, and by giving
treats and festivals: a method which seldom fails fuc.
ceeding with the multitude.

O&avius, having been presented to the people b[
the Tribune Canutius, concluded a very fiattein
ipeech, by a promise, not only of discharging the
gacy of three hundred Sesterces bequeathed by Cxfai
to each citizen, but to make an addition to it out oi
his own purse.

He also gave the games instituted by the Diaato
in honour of Venus Mater, and in commemoration ol
the victory of Pharalia, or according to others, o
Munda. There was a society eftabliflied purposely
for the celebration of these games: but the members
not caring, or daring to discharge their office, Ofa-
vius undertook it, and was at the whole expence,
Pnt. which amounted to an immense fum. He also pur
APPian. posed, conformable to an ordinance in Cafar's life-

time, to ere& in the middle of the Theatre, the
d Di&tator's statue, placed on a throne adorned with

* Authors only mention a hrone and a crown, but they doubtl
fppoi e a tatue. gol

gold, and having on its head, a crown of precious BRO.
#ones: But Anthony in conjunction with theTribunes at.C
prevented him; so little did he value- awinl his in- Cic. ad
gtitude to his friend, to whom e was so much in- At XV.
debted, provided he could-mortify his rival.
It was during these games, that appeared that fa- pi,,. I.
nous Comet, which was esteemed by the ignorant i.
and superstitious vulgar to be the feat of Caesar's foul.
Pliny has preserved us the description Augustus gave
fit in his own words, which I think will not be dif-
agreeable to the reader. He expresses himself in this
manner. "' During the celebration of the games I
gave, a bearded star appeared for seven days, in that
mt of the heavens which is nearest the great Bear.
It rose about the eleventh hour of the day, (an hour
before sun-set) was very bright, and visible to every
body. The multitude was of- opinion that the ap-
prance of this star denoted, that Caefa's foul had
been received among the immortal Gods: and for
that reason, we placed that symbol on-the head of the
fatue,. which we ihortly after consecrated in the
Forum." In this manner was eftablified, or rather
ined credit that impious flattery, whichidolifed Caefa.
He had, during his life-time, received divine honour,
and they were now continued to him; after'his death.
But the worlhip of this new divinity, who could be
Aolonger serviceable to any one, was greatly negleted,
.d would infallibly have fallen into total oblivion, if
Cefar's adoptive son had not acquired the empire of
the world. This star became the attribute which
tharaterifed him in the monuments erected to his
honour, and is at this time to be seen on several of
is medals.
To supply the prodigious expence requisite to an-Appian.
Iwer the distributions promised to the people, and to Dio.
defray the charges of the games, Oftavius had no
other resource than to fell his inheritance; and his very-
patrimony, even to the effe&s of his mother and fa-
ter-in-law, who had at last resolved to enter into his
reafures, and to afift him to the utmost in the pur-

8 suits,

A.R.70. suits, they had to no purpose endeavoured to difuac
~ C him from. When he left Brundufium.he carrie

away some money, which had been paid him by th
public receivers there. But this fum probably wi
spent in his march from Brundufium to Rome. An
thony so far from relinquiihing any part of what h
had seifed, made him pay dearly for the minutes fa
your, and harrafled him by all the methods he coul4
imagine. It was doubtless by his contrivance tha
the Senate, by a decree, required an account of th,
public monies which Cafar had appropriated. Se
veral private persons re-demanded the lands which th(
Dictator had taken from them. The public treafur
reclaimed the confiscations of the exiles. And lastly
Pcdius and Pinarius, coheirs with Ocavius, wer
obliged to withdraw their fourth, to secure it fron
the evalions of the Consul: but they afterwards g
neroufly relinquished it, in favour.of the person wh
was the only hopes of Cefar's friends and relation
All the Di&ator's polffeions were therefore fold, an
fold under their real value; because O&avius, on th
one hand, by obliging the purchasers, made so man
partisans; and on the other, he was in a hurry to ali
enate his effeas, that they might be no longer expo
to his enemy's malice. In this manner young Clfa
shewed himself the worthy heir of the person whos
name he bore; who hazarded every thing to raise hi
fortune; and et out with ruining himself, in order t
attain that distinguished rank he afterwards enjoyed
And in effet, he so far succeeded by this conduct, a
to become the darling of the people, and to makq
Anthony their aversion.

The division between them was fortly carried
the last excess. Anthony never ceased giving O&a
vius fresh fubje& of complaint: and he from thena
took occasion to inveigh publickly againtt Anthony
flopping at the corners of the streets, and haranguin
the populace, who assembled round him. His name
his youth, the insinuating and artful turns he made
use of, his mild, and at the fame time noble aspeC

the

the manifef injustice in Anthony's treatment of him, A.R;,2.
all concurred to render his cause favourable. The mt,.
very officers of Anthony's guard, who had all served '4
under Cafar, and had a veneration for his memory,
interested themselves in behalf of his son, and de-
clared to Anthony that they- flould be glad to fee. them
reconciled. Such a recommendation was equal to an
order, to a peribn who entirely depended on the as-
ferion of the soldiery for the execution of his schemes.
Whereupon a reconciliation was made; but not be-
ing hearty on either fide, it was lhortly followed by
a fresh rupture, and freh attempts were again made,
to restore peace between them. The end of all these
proceedings was an irreconcileable enmity to each
other. Anthony accused young Caesar of having en-
deavoured to corrupt some of his guard to aflaffinate
him, and he had them under examination before a
private committee of his own friends.
Oftavius complained loudly: he came to the Con-
ful's house to justify himself, but not being admitted,
heremained at the door, where he with great ear-
nnefns endeavoured to clear himself, insisting on the
contrary that it was Anthony, who every day was lay-
ing snares for his ruin. However, there is great pro-
bability of the truth of the fat. Seneca and Sueto- Sen. de
ius both confirm it: and Cicero,- whose authority is Cemn. 1 9.
unexceptionable, explains himself on that head in ao.
manner which puts it out of all doubt. " * The accu-
fation brought by Anthony against Oavius passes,
lays he, in the opinion of the multitude for an inven-
ton, contrived to-ruin that young man, and to plun-
der hlim of his effeas. But every person of sense and
probiv believes the thing and approves it." The
reason vhy Anthony had not the affair thoroughly
anamined into, might be, that he saw the people so
lr prejudiced in his enemy's favour, that he had no
hopes or being credited.
' Multitudini fi&tum ab Antonio crimen videtur, ut in pecuniam
"i0,celltis impetum faciat. Prudentes autem & boni viri & credunt
Um, & probant. Cic. ad Fam. XII. 23.
VCL. IX. D d So

A.LRos. So wide a rupture could not but terminate in an
A nt.- open war; and accordingly O&avius and Anthony

had both recourse to arms, but by no means on equal
terms. The first, without any title or authority,
had no other recommendation than his name, his
money, and promises, to gain over to his party his
father's veterans: whereas Anthony not only was
Consul, but had legions at his disposal, whose com-
mand had been conferred on him by public authority.

These were the legions of Macedonia, which Ce-
far had intended for the Parthian war. But Anthony
having procured, as I have mentioned in the pre-
ceding book, the government of that province, to
the prejudice of Brutus, changed the station of the
fix legions, which were there quartered, and confe-
quently were entirely under his direcion. However,
he save up one of them to Dolabella, upon his being
appointed Governor of Syria, in Caflius's stead. As
Anthony's projects were at that time in their infancy,
his next scheme was how to bring the remaining five
legions into Italy. In order to furnish himself with a
pretence, and at the fame time totally to strip the
Conlpirators, he applied to the Senate for the go-
vernnaent of Cisalpine Gaul, which was then in the
hands of Decimus Brutus. But as that assembly
would by no means hear such a demand, he appealed
to the people: and supported, according to Appian,
by Octavius's credit, with whom he at thatjun&ure
happened to be under a fort of reconciliation, he ob-
tained his request, and then made over Macedonia
to his brother Caius, at that time Prator. Where.
upon his first care was to fend for the Macedonian le.
gions to Brundufiumn; and as soon as he received ad.
vice of the arrival of four of them, he set out to pul
himself at their head.
(:.:. ~a Eut before he left Rome, doubtless through a de
Fa:. XI. ir of clearing hirrf !f of all reflections of ingratitudi

t' Caesar, and -.r which there was but too juRt
foun;iati n, he, Led a ratue to him in the Roftr
v ith thi mincr;l.:in, Par--ti optime ierito, that is, tc

'il~~~~~ p ~~~thl

the father and benefaaor of the Republic. Such an A.R- 70s.

Ant C.
homage paid to Cfar was an inveive against his . C
Murtherers, and tended, as Cicero has remarked, to
make them confidered, not as imple Assassins, but
,s Parricides. Nothing could be more disagreeable
to the Senate: but Anthony no longer consulted
their pleasure. His whole thoughts were bent on in-
gratiating himself with the multitude, and soldiery,
With this view his brother Lucius, who was Tri-
bune, proposed an Agrarian law, for diftributingDio.
among the citizens, together with other lands, the C'cPhi;'
Palus Pomptina, though it had not then been drained. 13, 1.'
This liberality, which was in a great measure chime-
rical, procured its author four statues; one from the
people, with an inscription whereby the thirty-five
Tribes acknowledged him for their Patron; another
from the Roman Knights, who gave him the fame
title; the third was erected to him by the military
Tribunes who had served under Cafar; and the fourth,
by the merchants and bankers.
The Consul Anthony himself conduced a colony ic Phil
to Cafilinum, a town of Campania, though Caesar had ii. xoz.
but very lately fettled one there. And in order to Dio.
make himself creatures among the citizens of the first Appian.
rank, he took upon him arbitrarily to bellow the go-
vernments of Provinces, or to delay their distribution,
as belt served his purpose. It was after all these tranf- Cic. ad
ztions that he set out for Brundufium, the ninth of Fam xn.
Otober. 3
Octavius perceiving his adversary to set out with o c;i. Phil.
considerable a force, was sensible that he mult be ll& d .
mined, unless he could find means to assemble troops xvI.
for his defence. He traversed Campania, Samnium,
nd all the parts of Italy where his Father's veterans
bad received settlements; and by giving them five
hundred denarii a man, gained a great number of them. 1. 5s ;16.
At the fame time he employed private emissaries to
etice away Anthony's legions; and, in a word, omitted
nothing which might put him in a condition to oppose
farce by force.

D d 2 Bru-

A.R.7oS. Brutus and Caflius were not drove out of Italy by
Ait. C. the war, they quitted it some time before. But as at

44 first they were not determined what measures to take,

they remained a while in the neighbourhood of Rome,
in expectation of ome opportunity which might fa-
vour their return.

The games, which Brutus, in quality of Pretor of
the city, was to give the people, flattered their hopes.
With this view Brutus spared no pains or cost to
make them magnificent. In the theatrical reprefen-
tations, he introduced hunting of fallow-deer; of
which he had collected a great number: nor did he
fell, or reserve any, but sacrificed them all to the
pleasure of the multitude. At Naples he saw a com-
pany of comedians'and musicians, which he hired to
play for him. And he wrote to his friends to engage
a celebrated aor, whom Plutarch calls Canutius. In
a word, he had this affair so much at heart, that he
begged and intreated Cicero to leave the country, and
go to Rome to afift at his games. Cicero neither
thought it honourable, nor safe for him to take such
a ftep. And Brutus would have itill run a greater
hazard in appearing personally there. He durst not
venture, but prevailed on C. Antonius, his collegue,
to act as his representative at the games, which were
celebrated the beginning of July.

The success was not equal to the hopes of the Con-
fpirators and their friends. The multitude was
charmed with the beauty and order of the festival:
they seemed to regret the donor's absence, and to
wish his return. They applauded, they clapt their
hands: but they went no rurther, and * Cicero com-
plains with son'e palfion, " that the Roman people
hl-ould make ue of their hands in applauding, and
not in defending the Republic." In fact, the Roman
people had nothing left but the name; being torn
by faations, and tyrannised by their rulers: and An-

* Mi:i ql: Itiri, :;r.t, eo vlui ftomnachi 3 moleftia eft, populur
R..,!:.nu. n;m:t.,- :ui- :. n in dcfendenda KRpublica, fed in pau-
Jeran , c :..;n-::c. I c. ad Art. XVI. z.

I thony's

thony's party, the soldiery, and all who had any re- A.R. 70o
gard to Caesar's memory, interrupted the games by Ant. C
making violent noises, till they had silenced Brutus's
advocates.

This attempt having failed, Brutus and Cafflus
were sensible that they had but little prospect of re-
eftablihing themselves, or of restoring with them the
ancient form of government: and when they saw
that the more affairs came to an eclairciffement, the
greater ascendancy arms gained over the laws; that
all Italy was divided betwixt Anthony and young Cae-
far, and that scarce any one thought of the Republic
that the troops seemed disposed to fell themselves to
which ever of them could bribe the highest; they
were at length convinced that in so corrupted a state,
the love of justice and an attention to the laws, was
a feeble resource, unless supported by force. As the
commission, which they had received to provide corn
for the city, had furnished them both with a pretence
and means of assembling some Thips, the ea became
open to them, and they were safe from any inter-
ruption in their passage. Brutus therefore went to
Velia, a maritime town of Lucania, to be ready to
embark the moment that the situation of affairs re-
quired it.
He remained some time in this town, and wasCic.ad
there the fourth of August, as appears by a let-Famn XI
ter of that date, wrote by him to the Consul Antho- 3
ny, in his and Cassius's name. This letter, which is
to be found among Cicero's epistles, discovers a no-
ble haughtiness, and generous audacity, corrected by
modesty : and I believe it will not be disagreeable to
the reader if I transcribe part of it. It seems An-
thony had ent them an insulting, threatening letter;
but as they were not to be- terrified, they returned
him the following answer. " t Think not to intimi-

This town lies not far from Cape Polinurus, which still retains
its name.
t Armorum fiducia nhil eft quod nos terreas. Neque enim decet,
convenit nobis, periculo ulli fubmittere aninum noltrum, Neque

D d 3 date

AR- 7t date us by your military force. It would be a re
At. C. flecion on us, to susser any danger to get the better

of our courage: and Anthony ought not to think
of commanding those, to whom he owes his liberty.
If we have reason to commence a civil war, your
letter will not prevent us: for the free are not as-
seaed by menaces. But you very well know that
nothing can bring us to that extremity : and it is there-
fore perhaps for that reason you assume so menac-
ing a tone, that our determination may be interpreted
the effet of fear. To tell you freely our thoughts
of you, we could with that the Republic might re-
tain its liberty, without any diminution of your rank
or forfeiture of your honour. We desire not to be at
enmity with you: but our liberty is dearer to us
than your friendihip. We would advise you to weigh
well what you undertake, and to confider the extent
of your capacity: and remember, not how long Cae-
far lived, but how hort a time he reigned. Our
prayers are, that your councils and designs may be
no less advantageous to the Republic, than to yourself.
Otherwise we hope, provided it be not to the preju.
dice of the Republic, that it may turn as little to your
disadvantage as poflfble."

It is certain this letter did not make a convertof
Anthonv: but in my opinion it greatly redounds tc
the honour of those who composed it; except that the
aversion they therein express to a civil war, does not
eafl!v coincide with the measures we lhall find they
tooX, as oon as they had assed the ea.
eft Ar.:or.o pcft!-andurn, it iis imperet quorum opera liber e. N'
si aa hortaren.tur ut bellum civile flucitare vellenmus, liter t ni
l:; -'rc:cerent Nula e:i. mi nl.:ti auCtol itas aud liberos e. Sec

r.::'crc inteligs Incn pol n s q'.:cqnm irnei-i: & fortaflis e r
rinaciter agis, ut iudicium noftl-run metis videatur. Nos in ha:
fec''i.tni s'mu , ut t cupi?nu:s in libcra Republica magnum atqu
h.2.,u. ec ;-: VoCe.-Mus c ad i.sullas i niliicii; fed tamen no!tr
l bei;:temn pluri-, quim tama n micitiam, ati emus. Tu etiam at
c'-i ;-:^-i vide, quid fucipias, quid l:itl:e:e poflis: neque, qi:a
di; ;xert CTefar, se.I uam non diu regnarit, sac cogites. DeP
cu::-a n;C. u: cnfiiia tu? Reipublicae fartaria tint ac tibi. Si i
r.;, u-, :'_: atque hcneltl Reublica, tibi quarn minimium nocean;
pta.. P or

Porcia had followed her husband Brutus: to Velia: A.R. 6o
and there he separated from him never to fee him Ant.c.
more. She foresaw this misfortune, and was under Plut.Brut.
the deepest afflition: but through the effec of her
resolution, her concern was a secret to every body,
till it happened to be discovered by a picture. This
was the adieu of Hector and Andromache, painted
from the lively and affecting description given us by
Homer. Porcia, on feeing a subje6t, so extremely
fimiliar to her own situation, could not refrain from
tears: and the was seen to cry several times that day.
A friend of Brutus, named Acilius, from this circum-
stance took occasion to apply two noted verses, which
Homer puts in the mouth of Andromache.
c * Yet while my Hector till survives, I fee

My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee.
Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all,
Once more will perith if my Hector fall.
Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share:
Oh prove a husband's and a father's care !"

PoPE.
Brutus allowed the application to be just: but ob-
served, that he could not properly make use of the
fame kind of language to Porcia, which Hector uses
to Andromache, who advises her to apply herself to
her needle, and to attend her houfhold. " For,"
t added he, " though through the weakness of her
sex she is certainly incapable of atchieving exploits
"equal to our's; yet, for elevated sentiments, and
" an affection to her country, he has certainly as
"good pretensions to heroism as any of us." Porcia
returned to Rome. Brutus crossed the lea and went
to Athens: and CafiPs set out soon after.

'* Extrp, txap 0C- /cli itfri nff7p, , r&vTylt ufT»p,
Hi kto ir'Tlt, rv a i o(
J you Q a pic rns .
T .

Hom. Iliad. VI. 49, 43o.
' A.' u
imo ' sTaytv, Srpiss
r ptia w fxl, vert ' T' Tr ExTEcpc.
'rt, AD d
p atp
o i'trai 9.Ics ra ieo-a s 9»ir W Xiu';0
J '
r Zaiii ci rp iul'i e; p ICra'

D d While

AR.os. While they were thus abandoning Italy, Cicero
At. c returned thither. As this voyage has some connec-

tion with the general affairs of the Republic, I think
it will not be improper to give some account of it.
c. ad I have already mentioned the motives which in-
At. xv. duced him to leave Rome, and to retire to his coun-

try-houfe. There he became a prey to his appre-
henfions, feeing what lengths Anthony's schemes car-
ried him; and not doubting but that he would occa-
sion much bloodfned, under pretence of avenging
Cxfar's death, but in reality to get rid of those who
might be any impediment to his ambitious views.
Nor was Cicero's heart ess affecqed by resentment and
concern, to fee the absolute command the Consul
usurped in Rome, and the ill use he made of it; by
exercising all kinds of rapine and injustice, by break-
ing through all laws, and oppressing the Senate,
without the leafi regard to decency: insomuch that
the Orator began almost to regret the loss of Cefar.
He more than once remarks, that Anthony observed
infinitely less measures than the person whose orders
he pretended to put in execution: and after all, Ci-
cero had some weight with Cafar, whereas Anthony
paid not the leat regard to him. " I was so well
received, fays he, by the Dicator, (whom may Di-
vine vengeance pursue even though he is dead), that,
since the Tyrant's death has not restored us our li-
berty, ervitude under such a mailer was not the
greatefc evil that could befal a man of my age. I
am af!haed to confess it: but having wrote it, I
do not care to f.rike it out."

-Vith fiuch fenti.rTents, which discover how much
.fcr-interes in:ue.nccd Cicero's aions, one must not
be surprised to ile him abandon Rome and Italy, ata
tin:e when his oppreTed country'leened to stand most

r. eed of his aiftance. But the danger alarmed
T it r:; eramn:us .prud i'!lin, (quem Dii mortuum perduint!)
it r -:.: ttati, quonian interfe'to rge liberi non fumus, non fuerit
d-...i:.; ;;:e fg:end!us. Rub:o, r.,:hi cred : fed jam fcripferam;

iz-;/c l.-,:i, dCc, d .:t. XV, .hi

l.,m .

him; and his fears magnified that danger, or at leaftAR. 7ol.
brought it nearer to his view. For he was not in the ^
cafe of Brutus and Cassius; having had no concern in
the conspiracy against Cefar. And though in the
present situation of affairs he might not have it in his
power to do the Republic any aual service, yet the
face of affairs might take a sudden change, and op-
portunities might offer, which might be luckily im-
proved to the advantage of his cause. These con-
derations had no weight with him: and from the
beginning of April, when he left Rome, to the end
of' June, at which time he embarked, he appears by Cic. XIV.
his letters to Atticus to have his thoughts entirelyadAttu.i.
bent on leaving Italy, at leaf for ome time. 19,
D. Brutus's camp in Cisalpine Gaul, or that of
Sex. Pompeius in Spain, would have been a very safe
retreat for him. But a camp neither suited his age nor
character. He Sometimes applied to himself, with a
small alteration in the words, Jupiter's advice, in Ho-
mer, to Venus:

t' Not these, O daughter, are thy proper cares,
Thee milder arts befit, and softer wars. POPE.
His aversion to the army, especially in a civil war,
vas so great, that he absolutely declares, that rather
than serve he would susser a thousand deaths.
With these sentiments, Greece was the only proper
place for him; and he presently determined to make
his abode at Athens. He had a particular induce-
ment to fix on that city: where his son, at that time
about one and twenty years old, was then studying
under the philosopher Cratippus. Cicero, who tho'

In all this space of time, he made but one lhort appearance at
Rome, in order to be present at the Senate, on the first of June.
nut the terror of Anthony's arms kept him away: and the morrow,
r perhaps that very day, he left the city., Cc. Phil. II . 1. xn . .
XV. ad Ate. . & 9.

TixroYu iuvr, £5 'roiJ diJs i
m ro\ vgis . *.
'AiM g
rI' g' i ifrsrt IvrI frEiFf ifr * ri/cro. Iliad. 1, V, 428,42,
h
Il omer it is ifp>. yi xco, which relates to marriagec,

an

A.R. 709. an affecionate father, was not so blind as not to per.

nt. C. ceive the want of natural talents in his son, thought,

that by being present he * might assist him in his ftu.
dies, or at least he might be able to judge, how far
he was capable of improvement. After having re.
mained a long time in fufpence, he at length de.
termined to set out for Athens: and embarking, as !
have already mentioned, towards the end of June, he
coasted Campania, making hort journies, and flop.
ping often. He chose to go by the Streights, rather
than by Brundufium, because that city being the ren.
dezvous of Anthony's legions, he thought it not fife
to expose his person there: At his setting out he pro-
posed returning to Rome by the beginning of the en.
cic. pil. suing year, at which time Panfa and Hirtius were to
L 6. commence their Consulship.

These two men, who had been Cafar's creatures
and staunch friends, retained a great affetion for his
memory, and consequently could not love Brutus,
But they had a very great regard for Cicero. Parti-
cularly Hirtius was in great intimacy with him. And
they both had as strong an aversion to Anthony,
whose imperious behaviour extremely disgusted them.
They appeared to have been men of honour, strongly
attached to the service of their country, and whopaid
all due deference to the authority of the Senate. In:
word, though Cicero sometimes reflects on them ir
his letters to Atticus, he had so great a value for them
as to intend returning to Rome, and resume a part it
the administration of public affairs, as soon as the'
entered into their office.
cic. Phil. He came to Syracuse the first of August, where h
L. ,, . & staid but one day. He then continued his voyage
ad A~·
xvi. . but was drove back by contrary winds to Leucopetra

a promontory of Italy, near Rhegium. Some day
after he set out again, and was a second time drov
back to the fame place. He then received fuchir
telligence from Rome, as made him entirely chang

Aut proderimus aliquid Ciceroni i aut, quantum profid pos
judicabimus, Cc. ad Att. XVI. 5.

his resolution. He was informed, that things seemed A. .7s.
disposed to a pacification; that Anthony had given Ant.
up his pretenfionsto Cisalpine Gaul; that Brutus and
Calfius were at liberty to return to Rome; and that he
was a little refie&ed on for being out of the way.
Cicero * thought himself obliged, according to his
own testimony, to the Etesian winds, who, like good
citizens, had refused to accompany him, when he was
abandoning the Republic: or, to speak without a
figure, as he had, with great relu&ance, taken the re-
solution of leaving Italy, he was glad to seize the lealt
gleam of hope, which could induce him to believe,
that he might safely return to Rome, and appear there
with rome charaaer. Whereupon he relinquished his
first design, and returned to Rome with all diligence.
However, he made a short itay at Velia, where were
Brutus and Cafflus, and conferred with them for the
last time.
These dispositions to peace, which had so charmed
Cicero, were no more than a finesse in Anthony, who
just then finding himself too closely pressed by young
Cefar, pretended to come into the measures of the
Senate. Nothing, which the Republicans hoped for,
came to pas : and when Cicero arrived at Rome the
thirty-firit of August, he found affairs less disposed
than ever to an accommodation. It is true the peo-plut cc.
ple expressed a great deal of joy at his return, and
that there was so great a concourse of citizens of all
conditions at the gates, to wait on him, that he was
detained there almost the whole day in receiving their
compliments and congratulations. But for Anthony;
f far from Cicero's having any reason to expe& any
civility from him, he had cause to fear, from the in-
formation he received by the way, the most fatal effets
of his resentment: and on that account he durfl not
be present, the next day, at the meeting of the Se-
nate. However, he concealed his suspicions, not to
* Iratis temporibus, in Graeciam, defperata libertate, rapiebar;
iuam me Etefiae, quasi boni cives, relinquentem Rempublicam pro-
teqi noluerunt. Cc. ad Fam. XII. z2.

give

A. R. 7. give the Consul offence, as he still preserved some
Ant. C.
A4. outward shew of friendship towards him; but sent
Cic.Phil. him an apology for his absence, exufing himfelfthat
I ". &o he had not recovered the fatigue c his voyage. An-

.9, thony was not to be thus impoled on, and being

highly exasperated, either at having miffed his blow,
or to find himself wrongfully fufpeded, he could not
even contain himself in the Senate,- insomuch that he
threatened to go in person, with workmen, to pull
down Cicero's house, and force him to come out.
However, he was at last appeased at the intercelion
of the Senators, and accepted of a fine, for the pay.
ment of which, according to cuffom, he exated
sureties.

The next day, the second of September, the Senate
met again, and Anthony being absent, Cicero came
there. I: was on this occasion that he delivered his
frft Philippic, wherein he speaks with a great deal of
moderaticn. It is entirely full of complaints, without
the least invective. He disapproves of Anthony's
proceedings, but without any malice. - And conclude
with an exhortation and some advice, which might
have been very erviceable to the person for whom it
was intended. I hall only cite one passage. " lam

afraid, fays he, (addressing himfelfto Anthony, as
if he were present) that not knowing the true path of
glory, you imagine it will be glorious for you to be
able alone to do more than all the Republic, and that
you had rather be feared than loved. If these are your
thoughts, y u have entirely mistaken the road to true
glory. To be dear to one's fellow-citizens, service-
able to the tate, to be commended, honoured, esteem-
ed, this is to be glorious : but to make oneself feared

* Verer, ne gncorans verun iter gloria, gloriofum putes, pluste
nnurn oll;e num cane, ; & metui i civibus quam diligi malls.
Quod si ita put-s , trtain ignoras iam gloriae. Carum effe civeml
bene d Repu'j:c- mc..r i. coli, diligi, gloriofum eft metui vero,
in odio e '! -vid ir.im, deteftabile, imbecillum, caducum. QMod
videmus, eta-.n in ti.n'lis, ipfi illi qui, " Oderint, dum metuant,
dixerit, perniciofun fuis'e. Cc. Phi!. I. 33.

I thbnk it would be better ci-ibu,

and

and hated, is an odious and detestable proceeding, A. R. 7o0.
and a situation which can never be secure,, but muR Aht C.
be liable to a thflufand accidents. ' Of this the stage
affords us an inftahce: and he t who was made by Atreus.
the poets to fay, ' Let them hate me, provided they'
,fear me,' dearly experienced the folly of such a doc-
trine."
The whole Oration is in this stile. Which never-
thelefs so offended Anthony, that from that moment
he declared open war against our Orator. He ap-
pointed another meeting of the Senate.on the I8th
of September, and ent Cicero personally a citation
to be there, and he there charged him with whatever
his malice and resentment could suggest. Cicero had
taken care not to obey the citation. He aflures us,
that Anthony's design was to have him affaflinated;
and that when once he had begun to imbrue himself
in blood, he would not be satisfied with a ingle vic-
tim. However, though he was not present, he soon
answered the Consul's furious charge by his second
Philippic: in which, after having cleared himself
from the reflexions which had been thrown on him,
he attacks his adversary in his turn, and taking him
from his infancy to his Confulihip, paints him in
such colours as make him equally an obje& of hatred
and contempt. This Oration, which has always been
tfteemed a master-piece, and which, though composed
by a man near fixty-three years old, contains all the
ire and spirit that could be expe6ced from a man in
the prime of life, was never pronounced. Cicero Manut,
composed it in his closet, and afterwards dispersed Argunm
copies of it among his friends, who presently made itPhl IL
public.
Anthony's conduct was a confirmation of his ene-
my's accusation. When he came to Brundufium, he
behaved like a madman, pretending to support his
command with as much rigour as if he had been a
.Consul of the ancient Republic, and not the leader of
afation; and by misplaced severities infliEted to a
ic:gree of'cruelty, alienating his Ibldiers affecions,

which

R. P 7. which it was so much the more his interest to endea.
At C. vour to gain by mildness and gratuities, as the com-

4+
Dio. mand he had over them was at least very equivocal.
~Appii. They had not for some time before been tho.

roughly satisfied with him, because he seemed too
remiss in avenging Cefar's death: and he increased
this diffatisfa&ion, by promising them no more than
a hundred denarii per man, at the fame time that
OCtavius gave five hundred to all who engaged with
him. In order therefore to shew their contempt of so
paultry a gratuity, they quitted him abruptly in the
midst of his harangue; which put Anthony into so
great a passion, that he leapt from his tribunal, fay.
ing, " I'll learn you to obey me." And having
taken from the Tribunes a lift of the most seditious,
he put three hundred of them to death; a great num-
ci. Phil. ber of whom were Centurions, who were executed
n. 4. 10. before his face, and in the presence of his wife Fulvia,
&. ' . whose bold and violent temper had perhaps a greater

liare than Anthony's, in these cruel executions.

This had but an ill effet. The troops, instead of
being intimidated, were only exasperated; and so
much the more diipofed to hearken to the follicitations
of OCavius's emissaries, who dispersed billets through
the army, wherein they opposed the mildness and
eenerof.ty of their young Chief, to Anthony's cruelty
and ford idnefs. The Consul was informed of it, and
endeavoured to compel his soldiers to deliver up these
secret agents for his adversary. But they were de-
termined not to betray them, and Anthony was not
able to get at the knowledge of any one of them. He
now.bean to be sensible that he had taken a wrong
method with them, and that it was necessary he flould
endeavour to regain their affecion, which his feve-
rity had alienated. He in ome measure succeeded,
and the main part of his army put itself in march,
purliant to his orders, along the Adriatic coast, for
Rimini; whilst he, at the head of a legion, called
the Larks, marched to Rome. This was originally
a Gauflih legion, raised by Cfar in that country: th

very

very name it bore, "Alaudae," or " Alaudarum Legion" A. R 70;
was Gaulish, and was given it because the soldiers of 44.
that legion wore a lark on their helmets. They were Cic ad
allmade Roman citizens by Ca:far, for their signal ser- Atts. V
vices. Anthony had a particular affetion for them, Cel. :s.
insomuch that he promoted several of them to civil & ibi C-
employments: and for which he is very justly re-Cic.PhiL
proached by Cicero.
With this legion under arms he marched into Rome, Ibd
and ordered a guard to be mounted at his house, in i. iv. V.
the fame form as in a camp. One may guess how
much this alarmed the inhabitants of that great city,
and particularly the Senate. Nobody doubted but
that he came purposely, not only to make himself ab-
solute in Rome, but to wreak his vengeance on his ad-
verfaries, all of whom he accused, especially Cicero,
of having been concerned in the murthering of Caesar.
He had explained his intentions on that article more
than once. Speaking of the Tribune Canutius, who
in concert with the principal men of the Senate, assist-
ed Oaavius to the utmost of his power: " Thiscic. ad
'man,"faid he in a full assembly of the people, "thinks l.,3.
; to be supported by a set of men, who, if live, will
" never be able to support themselves in the city."
And on another occasion he repeated the fame threat
in more express terms, declaring " that t nobody,
unless they were victorious, must expe& to live."
This was therefore no imaginary danger, and Oc- Dio,
tavius, by delivering therefrom both the city and Se- Appian.
nare, didl them an important service, for which he
could not be too much corimended, if his views had
been honest and upright; and if, from being the
lavi,ur of the city on this occasion, he had not oon
a:cr beckme its executioner. It is certain that at that
til!;e it mvas requisite for his interest that he should
o0,iole Anthony; and therefore whilst the latter was
' n iti!.m apud eos fibi locum qua:rere, quibus, fe salvo, locus in
ti;i a lt cric noi polfes.
t Nih qui viciffet; vi&urum neminem. Clc. Phil. I. z7. & V. oa.

gone

A. R. 7o0. gone to Brundufium, he alembled a body of troops
-Ant C. which Appian fays amounted to ten thousand men
Cic ad and by Cicero's advice marched towards the Capitol,
At. XVI. in hopes to be there before Anthony. He was so: and

his faithful Canutius having convened the people,
Otavius delivered an harangue, wherein, after having
summoned up Anthony's unjust proceedings in his
and the Republic's behalf, he declared that he came
to prote& his country against a cruel oppressor.

This discourse was very agreeable to the multitude.
But the soldiers, who imagined they were brought
thither to be the mediators of a reconciliation between
Cafar's friend and his heir, or perhaps to at against
the enemies of his memory, were highly offended to
find themselves mistaken in their opinion. They
could not content to draw their swords against An-
thony, who had formerly been their commander, and
was then Consul. They therefore demanded their
dismission from Otavius on various pretences, though
fbme made no scruple to tell him the true reason
of their discontent. Young Cfar behaved with re-
markable prudence under so disagreeable a circum-
stance. As he had no right to detain them, so far
from hewing any concern at their forsaking him, he
consented to every thing, took no notice of the bad
excuses made him by several, endeavoured to con-
vince and satisfy such as told him the truth, thanked
them all for their escort, and promised that they
should still feel the effe&s of his liberality. By this
mild behaviour he regained three thousand of them
on the spot: the reft soon repented having quitted
him, and returned to him in crowds. However, as
he at first found his forces greatly diminished, he
thought it not prudent to wait for Anthony in Rome:
but marched away with all expedition towards Ra-
venna to assemble more troops, and be nearer his
agents, who were dispersed among Anthony's legions,
endeavouring to debauch his men.

Every thing succeeded to his with. Not only the
veterans fettled in the several towns and villages of

that

that part of the country he trayersed, readily ranged A. R. 708.
under his banners; but an entire legion of Anthony, Ant. C.
called the Martial Legion, being on its march, flop- ci.4 bil.
ped at Alba, and declared for Ocavius. Anotherm. I. v.
(which was the fourth) soon after followed its exam-
pie: and Anthony received an account of this second
desertion, just as he was going into the Capitol, to
preside at an assembly of the Senate, convened by his
orders on the 28th of November. His intent at this
meeting was to procure a decree to the prejudice of
young Cafar: but this accident broke his measures.
He therefore presently dismissed the alsembly, and im-
mediately set out to join the legions which still conti-
nued in his service, for fear they hould also desert.
Though his forces were thus diminished, yet it did not
prevent him from marching towards Cisalpine Gaul, tic. ad
in order to recover the government of that province, Fam. XI.
which had been conferred on him by the people, but
which Decimus Brutus was in possession of, by virtue
of a decree of the Senate. This latter was fully de-
termined not to quit his poffeflion: and was therein
supported by all the Republican party, who had no
other asylum in all Italy. Thus, after many diffenr
Ions and disputes, broke out the civil war: nor in-
deed was it possible that so many violent quarrels
could be determined any other way than by dint of
arms.
The numbers on each fide were by no means equal. Appian.
Anthony had fill remaining, besides his guard, three
legions come from Macedonia, and a considerable
number of new levies. Decimus had at the most but
three legions, two of veterans, and one new raised.
But the inequality was still greater between the Ge-
nerals. Anthony had both experience and courage.
Decimus, though he served a long time under Caesar,
hs no great reputation in history, as a warrior.
As O avius had five legions at his disposal, to wit,
the two he had inveigled from Anthony, one of.new
troops, and two which chiefly consisted of veterans,
but'were intermixed with new.recruits, he had it in his
VUL. IX. E e power,

A. 7Lt. power, with these forces, to turn the balance on which
Ant. C. fide he pleated. But he was embarrassed in his de.
4+ termination. He hated Decimus, and feared An-

thony. It was indecent for him to take the part of a
person who had been concerned in his father's mur-
ther, and yet he could not help relenting the extreme
ill usage he had received from Anthony. Besides, he
was under engagements with the Senate, and he had
need of the authority of that august body to support
him, and to juttify his taking arms. He therefore
determined to pursue the route he had set out in: and
without making any diret advances to Decimus,
wrote to the Senate to offer them his service, with the
five legions he had assembled in Alba. Nor was this
all. For when his troops presented him the Fasces,
and entreated him to take the title of Proprator, he
declared that he would accept of no title of honour
and command, but from the authority of the Senate.
At the fame time he took care, by a proper bounty,
to secure the legions which had forsaken Anthony: he
reviewed them, and afterwards gave them five hun-
dred denarii a man, with a promise of five thousand
more after vitory.

It would have better pleased the Senate, if those
legions, when they forbook Anthony, had entered into
the Republic's service, instead of Oaavius's. But
this was not a time to make such a discovery. They
accepted Ocavius's offer with great thankfulness, and
promised to authorise him the first time the Senate
fat, which they believed could not be before the firit
of January. This answer mufl have been made by
some of the Praetors and Tribunes, in conjuntio
with a number of the moit eminent Senators; foi
Rome was at that time in a kind of anarchy. Withou
any Consul, Dolabella having been some time gone
into Syria: Brutus and Cassius, whom we may reckoi
at the head of the Pretors, had crossed the seas: ane
affairs were so embroiled, that there were no hopes o
bringing them to any regulation, till the new Consul
commenced their office.

3 Cicer

Cicero most probably had a great hare in the an- A.R. 7uS.
s#er which was returned O&avius. He had spent Ant.C.
the months of October and November at his country-
houses, to avoid Anthony's resentment. As soon as cic. ad
he knew that he had left Rome, he returned there am'XI
the th of December, under fronger engagements
than ever with O&avius. Not that he entirely con- Cic. ad
ided in him: the contrary appears in all his last let- Attic.
ters to Atticus, He plainly saw that if this youngXI'
man got the better of Anthony, Brutus would be in 14.
danger. And he was absolutely persuaded that, on
Brutus's safety, depended that of the Republic. Ne- xlv. a,
Verthelefs, from the almost daily application O&avius
made to him by letters, wherein he protefled that he xv.
would be entirely dire&ed by his advice; from the
follicitations of their common friends; and above all,
from the consideration of the danger with which An-
thony threatened him and the Republic at the fame
time, he was prevailed on to return the following an-
fwer to * Oppius, who strongly importuned him to
declare for young Caesar. " I cannot consent to your
request, unless 1 am assured, that Otavius not only
will not be an enemy to those who have killed the
Tyrant, but that he will be a friend to them." Op-
pius engaged for him. " Where then is the hurry ?
fays Cicero, I can be of no service to Octavius before
the first of January: and he may, the tenth of De-
cember, convince me of his intentions, by consenting
that Cafca enter into the office of. Tribune of the
people." This Cafca, who had been nominated for
this office, was the person who gave the first blow to
Cafar, in the manner I have related. O&avius kepr
his word, with regard to Cafca; upon which conditi-
'Dixi Oppio, quum me hortaretur ut dolefcentem, totamnque
'::Fim, manimlnque veteranorum comple&erer, me nullo modo fa-
c p::ioie, ni mihi exploratum effet, eum non modo non inimicum
Ir:,inoctonis, verum etiam amicum fore. Qum ille diceret ita fu-
ltrun, Quid igitur feftinamus ? inquam. Illi enim me opera ante
Kil. Jainuarias nihil opus eft. Nos autem ejus voluntatem ante Idus
t:C;:lbles erlpiciemus in Cafca. Cic. ad Att. XVI. 15.

Ee 2 ni

A. R. 70C. on, Cicero was under an obligation to observe the fame
Ant.C. punctuality with Oppius.
cic. ad The new Tribunes of the people, entering into
Xam.6 their office, as usual, the tenth of December, con.
Phil. ll. vened the Senate the twentieth of the fame month,
k Irv Cicero was there one of the first, and his presence

drew thither a great many other Senators; so that
there was a very full house. The Tribunes proposed
to recommend it to the Consuls ele&, Hirtius and
Panfa, to take the necessary measures that the Senate
might assemble with safety, the first of January;
and moreover they gave the Senators leave tooffer
whatever they hould think agreeable to the present
situation of the Republic. The fame day there was
let up in Rome a declaration from Decimus, notify.
ing his intention to keep Cisalpine Gaul in obedi-
ence and subjection to the Senate, and to the Roman
people.

Cicero made use of the liberty allowed by the Tri.
bunes, and comprized in his opinion the whole systei
of the present affairs of the Republic.. He was noi
satisfied with giving a charge and power to the Con.
fuls elect, to appoint a guard to protect the Senate
observing that this unusual precaution would be a llu
on Anthony, on whose account it was taken. Heat.
tacked him personally, and drew him in the moftodi
ous light; declaring that he ought no longer to b(
confidered as Consul, but as a public enemy. Hi
commended Dzcimus, who intended to oppose him
and extolled young Cafar's services to the Ikies, wh(
had preserved the Senate and the whole city fron
slaughter and defiruction. Lastly, he concluded tha
they ought to approve and authorise, by a decree
all that either of them had done, and should there
after do, in opposition to Anthony; adding, that i
would be proper to confer honours on those corn
manders, and to reward the soldiers, who stood up i,
the defence of the Republic and the authority of th
Senate; and for that purpose, to give it in charge t

[h

the Consuls ele&, to move this affair at the next A.R.7o0.
meeting of the Senate, which was to be on the first of An4. C
January. This advice was followed: and Cicero, who was
the author of it, when he came out of the Senate,
mounted the Rostra, and gave the people, who were
there assembled, an account of the decree which had
palsed the house. He handled some points afresh be-
fore this new audience, but till with the fame fire and
energy, and his discourse met with uncommon ap-
plause. These two Orations delivered the 20th of
December, one in the Senate, the other before the
people, are his third and fourth Philippics.
Anthony answered Cicero's orations, and the Se- Appian.
nate's decree, by fa&s. He pulhed on his enterprise,
and having loon compelled Decimus, who found him-
self not in a condition to keep the field, to shut him-
self up in Modena, he besieged him there.
Such was the situation of affairs, that in all Italy
the Republican party, supported by the whole autho-
rity of the Senate, had no other troops but Deci-
mus's, that it could entirely depend on. Anthony
vai at open war with him, and he received but a very
uncertain aflfifance from O&avius, which might soon
b:come more fatal than it was then useful. This
fame party acquired considerable forces, in Greece
and in the East, under Brutus and under Calfius, and
with incredible dispatch.
On leaving Italy, these two Republican Chiefs had
formed their scheme of entering into the governments
of Macedonia and Syria, which had been given them
by Caesar, ratified by the Senate, and afterwards
iken from them by Anthony. They were immedi-
aely received at Athens with all imaginable honours;
and the Athenians erected statues to them, which they Di,. 1.
aced by those of Harmodius and Ariftogiton, whoxLviL
ad formerly delivered Athens from tyranny. Caifus
fidnot stay long there, but departed.to try his for-
ue in Syria. Brutus, being thus left alone, seemed PIut.Brut.
tr Ibme time to be wholly employed, in his favorite

E e 3 fludies,

A. R.7cS. studies, with the most celebrated Philosophers of the
Ant. Academy, and Lyceum, Theomneftes and Cratip.
For. Epif. pus. But his real thoughts were bent on war. He
It. i began by engaging all the flower of the Roman youth

which was at Athens, imbibing knowledge at the
fountain-head of all arts and fiences. These were
officers which he designed for the troops he flould
afterwards raise. The most noted among them were
young Cicero, and the poet Horace, whose father,
though no more than a freed-man, and a colle&or of
the taxes by profession, but being a man of solid
sense and elevated notions, gave him an equal edu.
cation with the Senators children. As for Cicero's
Son, Brutus, after having examined him, commends
him much, in a letter to his father. " I tam so
well satisfied, fays he, with your son, from his ap-
plication and perseverance, from his greatness of
foul, and pun&ual discharge of all his duties, that
he seems never to forget whose son he is..... Be
persuaded, that to attain honours equal to your's,
his father's glory will be his least recommendation."
And in fat it appears by several passages in Cicero's
letters concerning his son, that this young man had a
generous and honest heart: insomuch that, though
no very fnining genius, he might have supported the
glory of his name to a certain pitch, if he had not
Plin. afterwards ftupified himself with drink. When Bru-
XIV. 2:.

tus acquired an army, he gave him a commifllon of
rank, and made Horace a legionary Tribune.
c;c. Phil. He did not require much time to raise an army.
X. Piut Pompey's veterans, who had fought at Pharfalia, and
Dio. i. were still dispersed about the country, readily entered
XLVII. under a Chief who defended the fame cause. Some
Appian; ci,.Pisi. fragglers of Dolabella's army, who was already come
a Iv. into Asia, and two bodies of horse which were de-

t Cicero tuus sic mihi e probat induftria, patientia, labore, ani
mi magnitudine, orrni denique officio, ut prorfus nuhquam dimitter4
,ideatur cogitationem, cujus fit fillus.... Tibi perfuadeas, non fort
ilii abutendum gloria tui, ut adipifcatur honores pateraos. E. ad
Brut. II. 3.

figne4

fgned for that Consul, remained with Brutus. A A. R. 7s.
legion, commanded by Pifo, Anthony's Lieutenant, Ant. C
came and presented themselves to Cicero's son. But
what chiefly strengthened Brutus, was the accession
of Q Hortenfius the Deputy-governor of Macedonia,
who, in lieu of keeping it for Anthony's brother,
gave it up to Brutus, together with the command of
all the troops. The Kings and neighbouring Princes
of Macedonia imitated Hortenfius's example. Brutus
also seized a great quantity of arms, which Cafar
had ordered to be made at Demetrias, a town of Thef-
faly, for the service of the Parthian war: and he re-
ceived considerable fums of money from the receivers-
general. So that in an instant he had ample supplies
of soldiers, arms, money, and all other necefaries.
In these cafes, it is no inconsiderable matter to have
made a beginning. Brutus's forces were shortly aug-
mented by three legions, commanded by Vatinius.
This man, whose bad morals, as I have already men-
tioned, rendered him thoroughly contemptible, but
who nevertheless was not to be contemned as a soldier,
had been ent by Czefar into Illyrica to suppress some
commotions there. But the Illyricans courage being
raised by Cefar's death, they gave Vatinius such a
check, as obliged him to retire to Dyrrachium.
During these transactions, C. Antonius, on whom the
government of Macedonia had devolved by his bro-
ther's resignation, arrived at Apollonia with seven co-
horts: and being informed that he had no chance
of getting Macedonia, he purposed to make himself
some recompense, by securing Vatinius's legions. But
here again Brutus anticipated him, and got to Dyr-
rachium before him, where he found the gates shut
against him. For Vatinius was Brutus's enemy, both
in point of party, and in consequence of the oppo-
fition of their characers, than which nothing could
be greater. But the troops made no hesitation which
of the two Chiefs to prefer. They hated the one,
as much as they eteemed and refpeted the other.
And they even gave Brutus, before they entered

E e 4 into

A.R. 70.into his service, a remarkable proof of their affe
Ant Ction.

He had made a forced march cross a country co
vered with snows. When he came before Dyrrachi
urn, he found himself quite spent for want of fulte
nance: and there being no provisions to be ha,
among the troops which had accompanied him, the,
were obliged to apply to Vatinius's advanced guards
to acquaint them with Brutus's situation, and to bet
some supplies from them. Immediately the contef
was, who should first procure them the bread, wine
meat, and whatever else they wanted.

Vatinius loon perceived that there was no poffibilit
of keeping troops, thus disposed, under any difci
pline. He therefore made a virtue of necelity
opened the gates, and delivered up the command o
the troops to Brutus.

That I may have no further occasion to mention;
man so little worthy of remembrance, I hall here ob
serve, that two years after he obtained a triumph, un
der the Consulship of Lepidus and P!ancus. Hi
scarcely deserved this honour for his exploits in Illyri
cum. But the Triumvirs, who then were masters o
the Republic, were perhaps glad to reward so ok
and so faithful a servant of Cafar.

C. Antcrius did not take example by Vatinius,
but helu ut to the last extremity. Perceiving th(
inrabitants of Apollonia to be entirely devoted tc
Brutus, he quitted a disaffected city, and marchec
tcw,;d Bu:hrotum. In his march, Brutus cut thre(
of his cohorts to pieces. Some time after Cicero'!
f( r. ained a fresh advantage over him. And at las
Biujus Itund means to surround him and all hi!
trc-ps. in a bkoogy country, so that he had no poffi
' v c' extricating himself. Brutus's troops wen
t-,r a ktacking him: but he stopped them. " Letut
- be n-erc. ul, fald he. tofoldiers, which will fhortl
*b hin our own lcrvice." Nor was he mistaken,
Caits's roops, charrned with their enemy's generosity,
put thenfelves under his command, and even delivered

him

him up their General, who by this means became A.R. os,
Brutus's prisoner. He was treated with the greatest 4. c
humanity: insomuch that Brutus permitted him to Cic. ad
write to the Senate, and in his letter to take the title Brut-LI 7.
of Proconsul.
These letters were read in the Senate the 13th of
April, in the year of the Consulship of Hirtius and
Panfa. Brutus and Caflius were still in Italy, the
middle of the month of August in the preceding year.
So that Brutus employed very little more than seven
months to raise a powerful army, and to make him-
self master of Greece, Macedonia, Illyiicum, and
Thrace.
Caffus, during this time, made not less progress
in the East. He, by his dispatch, divested Dolabella
of Syria, in the fame manner as Brutus got Macedo-
nia from C. Antonius. Dolabella had set out from
Italy soon enough to have prevented Caflius: and
besides, the dignity of Consul with which he was in-
vested, and the troops which he took with him, ren-
dered him far superior to a rival, who had no other
recommendation than his character, and the merit
of his former services in that country, against the Par-
thians, after Caflus's. defeat. But Dolabella was in
no hurry: he marched gently through Greece, Ma-
cedonia and Thrace: and when he came to Asia Mi- Cic. Phil.

XI. Do.
nor, he would not proceed till he had taken it from Appian.
Trebonius, who was at that time the Governor.
Herein he pursued the plan, concerted betwixt him
and Anthony, of stripping all the Conspirators, and
appropriating to themselves the spoils.
As he found he could not carry his point by force,
he had recourse to fraud. He made the greatest pro-
teftations of friendship to Trebonius, and profcffd an
uncommon regard for him; and at lengtli so tar fuc-
ceeded, that if he did not put an entire confidence in
him, at least he did not guard against him, as against
an enemy capable of the molt desperate attempt At
a time therefore when Trebonius thought himself
safe in Smyrna, Dolabella entered the city by night,

and

A-R. 7. and made him his prisoner. And not content with
A^. c. depriving him of his liberty, his government, nor

even of his life; under pretence of avenging Caesar,
but from a real motive of insatiable avarice, without
anyconfideration for his rank of Consul, put him to
the torture for two days, to oblige him to discover
where the public money was lodged: at the end of
the second day he ordered him to be beheaded. As.
ter the execution, the soldiers, as inhuman as their
General, scandalously dragged his carcase to the ea
and threw it in. They next carried his head, at thc
point of an halbert, through the streets of Smyrna,
and afterwards played with it, as with a ball; rolling
it to one another on the pavement, until it entirely
loft the form of a human head. Trebonius lofll his
life the first of all the Conspirators: the reft, for the
most part, followed him oon.

Whilst Dolabella by so detestable a method goi
possession of a rich province, but which seems not to
have been very well supplied with troops or ammuni-
tion, Caflius made himself master of Syria and of eight
legions which happened to be there, and had been as-
fembled in that country on account of a civil wa
which had lafled near three years. This war broke ou
on the following occasion.
no. When Car left Syria, through which he hac
-Apian. passed in coming out of Egypt, he gave the conm

mand of that province to a young man, a relation
named Sex. Cxfar. He also left one legion with him
but his age, effeminacy, and the voluptuous life he
led, prevented his gaining the efeem of his soldiers
Cecilius Baffus, a Roman Knight, a man of enfe and
courage, and a partisan of Pompey, who, after hi
patron's misfortune, had retreated to Tyre, though
irom this circumstance, that it would be no difficul
matter to supplant this new Governor. He began b
lecuring that city: and succeeded without any trou
ble; bv reason the Tvrians were not well affeced ta
Caviar, who, con:tormable to his constant pra&ice 0
appro ing of ail methods to raise money, not except

in'

lag sacrilege, had plundered the treasures of the Tern- A.R. 7o.
pie of Hercules, who was held in great veneration tAnc
among them. Baffus afterwards attacked Sex. Cafart
but meeting with a repulse, he contrived to debauch
his soldiers, and managed his intrigues so well and so
luckily, that they at last affafinated Sextus. The
legion acknowledged Baffus for their Chief, and in
this manner he became master of Syria. But, as
he expected not to be long quiet in his new govern-
ment, he made choice of Apame, a very strong city,
and there formed his arsenal; he also augmented his
troops as much as poflible, by enlisting every one
that offered, even the very slaves. This came to pass
whilst Cafar was carrying on the war in Africa against
Metellus Scipio.
Baffus kept his ground during the remainder of the
Diftator's life, who did not think this affair of fuffi-
cient importance to go there in person. Antiftius cic. ad
Vetus by his order besieged Baffus in Apame, andAtt. Xrv
was repulsed by the Parthians, whom this politic9'
Knight had found means to engage in his quarrel.
Statius Murcus, a man of merit sent with three le-
gions from Rome, at the expiration of his Pratorihip,
to govern Syria in quality of Proconsul, had no bet-
ter success. He called Q,. Marcius Crifpus to his as-
fiftance, who brought him three more legions out of
Bithynia: so that with all these forces united, they
found it no difficult matter to hut up Baffus in
Apame, but they did not find it so easy to force him
there.

Affairs were in this situation, when Cafflus attend-
ed by his little convoy landed in Syria. Lentulus
Spinther, Trebonius's Questor, had supplied him
with some men and money, which he makes great
merit of in a letter to Cicero. But these forces were Cic. ad
not at all proportionable to the enterprise. Caflius's Fam. XII
name, his reputation, the cause he supported, these 4'
were the means by which he at once became matter
of eight legions. The fix of the besiegers were given
up to him by the Generals themselves. Baffus, whom

Ap-

A.R. s. Appian reckons to have two legions, to wit, that eO
Ant. C Sex. Cafar, and another which he himfelfhad formed

out of the new levies, required a great deal of en.
Cc. ad treaty to give up the command. He tought it ver
Fam. x. hard that he should have been at all the pains and ha.

zard, and that another should enjoy the fruits of his
labours. But not being able to prevent his soldiers
fending a deputation to Cassius with a tender of their
services, he was obliged to open the gates of Apame.

This first success, so great, so unexpeced, was
immediately followed by a second of the fame na-
ture. Dolabella had sent his Lieutenant Allienus into
Egypt, to demand the afiftance of Cleopatra, who
then was sole Regent, having destroyed the last of the
J'S Ptolemys, her brother and husband, by poison. The
Antiq.
xv. +. Queen consented willingly, on account of the regard

she preserved for Cafar's memory. She sent Dola-
bella an Egyptian fleet, and Allienus conduced by
land four legions, composed partly of the remains of
the armies formerly commanded by Pompey and Craf-
sus, and partly of the Roman cohorts which Cefar
had left in Alexandria. Cafilus had notice of this
march; he went and met Allienus in Judea, and ob-
liged him to give up his four legions. In this man-
ner Cafius.found himself at the head of twelve legi-
cic. ad ons, the 7th of March of the Consulship of Hirtius
Fam. x;. and Panfa, which day the letter he wrote to Cicero,

giving an account of these lucky events, was dated.
cic. P1i1. One may judge how great was the Senate's joy
x. & XL when they heard of the forces of Brutus and Caflius,

They immediately confirmed by pblic authority,
conformable to Cicero's advice, the government of
,te provinces and the command of the armies which
they had apprpri2ted, without any other title than
their zeal, nd the necessity of the times. They in-
veied them w ith the mrr.c ample power that had ever
been given any Proconsul: and as Dolabella, on ac-
count of Trebonius's rrcrther, had been declared a
public enemy, the Senate charged Cassius to make
war against him; with this remarkable clause, that in

what-

whatever province he ihould enter in order to prose- A. R. o.
cute that war, he Ihould carry a superior command nt4C.
to the governors, or particular magistrates of that
province.
To conclude at once Dolabella's history, I hall Appian.
observe that he soon closed his life in a manner worthy Dio.
his presumption and ambition. Notwithstanding he
was afifted by Cleopatra, by the Rhodians, the Ly-
dians, and some other people of those parts, he still
found his forces far inferior to Ciius's. Liberty,
that endearing found to the Romans, and the autho-
rity of the Senate determined in favour of the latter,
all the Romans which were fettled in Asia Minor and
Syria. By this means he was reinforced by several
squadrons of vessels, which were put into his hands
by their commanders, and of them he formed a nume-
rous fleet, and put Statius Murcus at the head of it.
Serapion also, the Governor of the isle of Cyprus for
the crown of Egypt, but who appears to have been
in an opposite party to Cleopatra, and perhaps had
some attachments with Arfinoe her filter, ent Caflius
some supplies.

Neverrhelefs Dolabella, blinded by his avarice,
undertook to recover his government of Syria. He
had also taken the resolution, in cafe he should not
succeed there, to embark his troops on board fore
transports, he had collected for that purpose, and go Cic. ad
and join Anthony in Italy. But he oon found theFam" X'I
impuflibility of executing this design. Two impor- 4 & 15.
tanc cities, Tarsus in Cilicia and Laodicea in Syria,
still held out for him. To the latter of these cities
he went, and there fortified himself; but was soon
followed by Caflius, who came and besieged him,
both by sea and land. They had several engage-
ments, which always proved to Dolabella's difadvan-
tage: and at last the city was delivered up to Cafius's
troops by treachery. Several of the fally-ports wivre
cit open to the besiegers, by which they entered,
and made themselves masters of the place. Do!a-
bclla perceiving himself near falling into the hands of

his
7

AR. 7o. his enemies, and apprehending he liould be treated
At. c in the fame manner he had served Trebonius, or.

dered a save, in whom he could most confide, to kill
him. The slave obeyed, and then stabbing himself
with the fame sword, fell dead at his master's feet.
Cassius ordered Dolabella's corpse to be honourably
interred, being of opinion, that humanity would not
allow him to retaliate the outrages which had been
exercised on the body of the unfortunate Trebonius,
He also treated the officers and soldiers, which had
served under Dolabella, with great mildness, and
though they had been declared public enemies as well
as their Chief, yet he rather chore to augment his
army with them, than ftricly to put in execution the
Senate's decree: he therefore enlisted as many as
would enter.
A. Gtel. It may not perhaps be improper on this occasion,
1U. 9 to make mention of the horse Sejanus. This was a

horse of extraordinary beauty, and said to be of the
fame breed, as the horses of Diomedes King of Thrace,
which were fed on human flesh, and which Hercules,
after killing Diomedes, took to Argos. But this fine
horse was reckoned unlucky to his masters, because
all, through whose hands he passed, came to an un-
happy end. The first was one Cn. Seius, from whom
the orfe was called Sejanus, which is as much as to
sav Seius's horffe. This Seius was executed by An-
thony's'order. Dolabella, having heard speak of this
extraordinary horse, had a mind to purchase it, as he
went by Argos in his way to Syria; he did so at the
L 7l1. 15. price of a hundred thousand Sesterces. We havejuft

seen what was the end of him. From him he passed
to Caflius, and from Cassius to Anthony: and these
two, as well as Doiabella, were reduced to a necessity
of killing themselves. From hence this horse became
a proverb: and in order to expfefs a man uncom-
monly unfortunate, they said that he had the*horfe
Se anus.

I return now to the public tranfaf&ions. One may
perceive by the foregoing facts that, in the year fuc.

ceedinp

ceeding Cafar's death, all the forces of the Roman A.R. 701.
empire Eastward from Greece, were devoted to the Ant.C
Republican party. Cornificius supported the fame
interest in Africa, and was attached to the Senate, to
Cicero, to Brutus and Cassius. Sex. Pompeius, who
in the course of the fame year, made himself malter of
Sicily, thought more of establishing his own particu.
lar authority, than of restoring the public liberty.
But as he was a declared enemy to Caesar's memory,
and as, in cale Brutus and Cassius had succeeded, he
had neither sufficient merit, nor forces, to prevent
their pursuing their own measures, he may be reckoned
in the fame party. These were the armies and the
Chiefs who supported the Republican fa&ion; and if
all these forces could have joined D. Brutus, and ated
in concert in Italy, the Republic had been saved.
But they happened not to be ready in time: and an
inevitable delay was the cause of their detrudtion and
the ruin of liberty.
Westward, of three Generals, who at the head of
three armies ruled in Gaul and Spain, two were but
little to be depended on, and the third was too far off
to be of any afiftance to Italy. Lepidus, Proconsul
ofGallia Narbonenfis and Citerior Spain, was a man
of much ambition and little genius, without princi-
ples or resolution, but ill affected to the Republic,
and who had no other view than to aggrandise him-
self; this man, but from the circumstances of the
times, would never have made any extraordinary
figure in life. Plancus, Proconsul of Gallia Major,
who jointly with D. Brutus was in nomination for the
Consulship, had sense and parts: but, as he pro-
mied much and performed but little, there was no
confiding in him: he was not so ill-intentioned as Le-
'id us, but as little disposed to hazard his fortune for
tie ;vub!ic cause. Pollio, Proconsul of Ulterior
(:?L-i . .; Tred from them both. He was eminent for

-;i ' :; !_ ~andi courage, and though he had been for-
: - : i,;: c.i i to Cafar, yet he still retained a tinge

- i.ialican spirit. But he was too remote to

be

A. R. 7s. be engaged in the center of affairs: they were decided
Ant. . without him; and that be might not be entirely us-.

less, he thought himself obliged to follow Aadnoy's
colours.

All these Generals, from all parts of the empire
were attentive on Italy, wherein, besides the three ar-
mies mentioned above, severally commanded by De.
cimus, Anthony, and Otavius, the Consuls Hirtius
and Panfa were railing frelh forces, as I all relate,
as oon as I have finished what little remains to be said
of the year in which Csefar died.

I have hitherto taken but little notice of those pre-
tended prodigies, with which antiquity abounds, as
they are commonly either false, or altered in the re-
lation, or natural effecs which the ignorance of
causes has transformed into surprising wonders. But
it is impoflible to pass over in filence.that remarkable
weakness in the Sun's rays during the whole year of
Cafar's death. Every body is acquainted with that
beautiful passage of Virgil, wherein it is mentioned.

* The Sun the fate of Caesar did foretel,
And pitied Rome, when Rome in Cefar fell.
In iron clouds conceal'd the public light,
And impious mortals sear'd eternal night.

DRYDEN.
Not only Virgil and all the Poets of that time, but the
gravest Historians attest this phenomenon. The spots,
which our Astrologers have discovered, by the tele-
scope, in the Sun's face, explain it: and it was no
more than an incrustation, which being thicker than
ordinary, was more difficult to be dissolved.
io. 1. In this fame year, Dio mentions the death of Ser-
XLV.
Vai. ax. vilius Ifauricus, a venerable old man, who had lived
vi. 5- ninety years, in a constant state of good health and a

ile etiam extinto miferatus Cesare Romam,
Quum caput obfcur nitidum ferrugine texit,
Impiaque ternam timueruat fecula noaem.

VIRx. Georg. I. 466.

per-

perfet use of all his faculties. He had been honoured A. 7·3
with the Consulship, Cenforlhip, and a triumph, and '
was father of that Ifauricus whom Caofar took for his
Collegue in his second Consulship. The abovemen-
ioned Dio and Valerius Maximus have thought it
worth their while to transmit to posterity a remark-
ible circumtance in his life. As he was passing by
theForum he fawa criminal arraigned, and the wit-
neffes under examination. Whereupon he came for-
ward, and addressing himself to the Judges, who
ere much surprised to fee him interest himlelf in an
affair wherein he did not seem the least concerned,
he said to them: " I know not who that man is,
" nor wherefore he is accused. I only know that I
" met him one day in a narrow way, he on horse-
" back, and I a-foot; and that, not only he did not
[ dismount, but pursued his way, without so much
" as itopping, or hewing me the least mark oft re-
"fpea. I therefore submit it to you, Gentlemen,
whether what I have alledged against him, ought
"to have any weight in the sentence you are going
"to pronounce." Whereupon the Judges, accord-

to the testimony of the above authors, would
arcely hear the prisoner's defence, but unanimously
tondemned him, imagining him capable of any thing,
So could fail in respect to such a man as Servilius
1auricus.
I now proceed to the year wherein Hirtius and
anl were Consuls.
VOL. IX. Fs SECT.

[ 434 ]
SECT. II.
The dpcf.:iUns of the to ccnJfls, witb regard to tld

fat e rs tle rpublick. The Senate, contrary to tbt
cd'ice f Cicero, orders a deputation to Anthony. Oc.
tCviNs is invested with the title and authority of Pro-
fr.ftcr. Cicero becomes surety for him to the Senate.
A fla.ue is decreed to Lep.dus. Infiruions given t
the Cdepuies of the Senate. Sulpitius, one of them.
dies upon arriving at the camp f Anthony. The ba,
Uiccefs of te deputation. A tumult is declared b th
Senate. A fatue is decreed to Su pitius. A new de.
putation is ordered to Anthony ty the Senate. Cicero,
'bcm they put in the number of the deputies, excufej
himsef, ad thus renders the afair abortive. Lepidu.
w;itcs to the Senate to exhort them to peace. Cicrn
cp'fs it. Anthony's letter to Hirtius and Oftavius
,Iir:i::s and Ovius approach to Modena. Pigeon
e;iplcd' to carry ad bring back difpatcbes. Afigb
w.hertin Panfa is wcunded. Anhbony in returning t
L's c.';;p is attacked, and overcome by Hirtius. 08a
:':!, :'.'o was left to guard the camp, defends bimfil
rcaift Lucius, brother of Anthcny. The enate extoi
prcdiicz/ly the aanLantcge gained over Antheny.
;-: ki:ttie, L '-ir e lines of Ainthony are forced. Hir
tirst i kil!ed. Alzthvsy raises te Jiege, and gain tl
.i.Fs. Oflczviuss d os lt purl!e Him. Diffculties i
, :ira'c ,'ig th. inir.gues of the times which followe
--rEr -r5: g of the Jiege of Mo'erta. The deatb h
Pa;,ja. nitkc7y is decl'.ared an enc. to the Pubiti
The get'rcot' qs Att . he Senate endeazours
:p!l:' dwn OC- 'iuis. ,n eqiivccal expre.on of Cicer,
wih r tgar t y5u;,g Caj'r. FTe ppcfite prjitds al
inttreftjs Js O i-,.:vius and the Senate. Ibe Senategiv
G.:.:s ' a pretxt -.'i.ich e makes lfe cf to decl4
-i~;:9; C. ria-ius approaches towards Artbcns). I
i.-::ies Lepid:s and olio to join witb him. He ?
:.'fs to the Cci.'h.:p. Cicero bcom;es is de,

J1

supports him. The Senate rejeSis the demand of Os7a-
v:us. 'hejunSiox of Lepidus and Anthony. The Se-
nate has recourse to Otavius : who takes that oppcr-
tunity to usurp the Conful/hip. Complaints of Brutus
against Cicero, contained in two letters, the one to Ci-
crro himself, and the other to Atticus. hke founda-
ticn of the town of Lyons.

A. HIRTIUS. A. R. 709.

Ant. C.
C. VIBIUS PANSA. 3t.
T HE Consuls entered on their charge, were both

creatures of Caesar. Panfa even owed his rife
to him upon a particular account: for being the son
of one who was banished, it would not have been
poible for him to have arrived at these honours, if
Cefar had not removed the obstacle which the laws
of Sylla laid in his way. It eemed as if they were
attached not only to the fortune, but to the person of
their friend for they cherished his memory fill after Cic. 6.Ph
his death, as Cicero observes particularly of Hir- bid. xiii.
tius; and they were very zealous, especially the last, 26.
for the validity of the as and decrees of the Dic-
tator. Thus the Senate, which Anthony calledjuftly
enough the camp of Pompey, had sufficient motives
for distrusting the Consuls.
They, on the other hand, pretended to be good
and aithful citizens. They shewed themselves friends
to peace, good order, and the laws, so far as to con-
sent that the murder of Cfar hould remain unre-
vengd, rather than give occasion for a civil war;
especially as the indecent and tyrannical conduat of
Anthony had made them revolt, and they were per-
,.aded of the necessity of bringing him to reason, and
frefiraining his outrages. By this method they ated
lteeably to the system of the Senate, the great ob-
eit of which was the war against Anthony, though
' ieus difcipulus-valde amat ilium quera Brutus nofter fiucia-
: Clc. ad Att. xiv. 22.

F f they

A. R . they did not always proceed so fast as the Senate
Ant. C. would have ilhied, and particularly Cicero, whose

ardour would neither susser obstacle nor delay.
Cic. Pil On the it of January, the Senate being assembled,
V' and the Consuls having proposed to deliberate on the

f.tuation of the Republic, Cicero advised them tc
ac; with all imaginable vigour. FufiusCalenus, who
had been consul some years before, father-in-law to
Panfa, giving his opinion first, had broached the ad.
vice or fending deputies fron the Senate to Anthony.
CicerD refuted him with furprizing vehemence, filp.
poring his opinion with very weighty reasons. He
observed, that t would discover a vilible want of re.
,Ilition in the condut of the Senate, if, after having
upon the 20th or December preceding, extolledthok
-who had taken arms againt Anthony, they hould ir
thirteen days time propose a negotiation with him
I-Ie thought they had reaibn to apprehend, that bythi:
vweak conduct they would intimidate the soldiers an
reople of Italy, who ardently epoufed the public
cu; e. In short, he oretold thnt the deputatioi
would be unfucctfsful. * " If you order, fays he t

the fenatcrs. your deputies to beseech Anthony, h
' v:will dcl'pii vyou. If, on the o:her hand, you pre
tc tend to give him orders, he will not hearken to you.'
Cicero ccniuded then, that the best way was to pus
the war with the utmolt vigour, and for that end t
ave fliil pox.er to the Consuls, strengthening ther
w.h the authority of the famous decree of the Senat
to which they had recourse upon the mot preling o0
calo;ns; thlat is to lay, by ordering them to take car
tha: the Republic hould luffer n harm. These tw
contrary opinions divided the Senate, and the debal
lasted three days. At last Fufius gained his poin
and the deputies were named, all persons of consul:
cigniti ; to wit, the famous Counsellor ServiusSu
pic:us Pifo, father-in-law to Cafar, and Philip, hu

* Leatos decerrntis: si ut deprecentur, contemnet si ut ipel
-:, nol auiiet. Cic, Phil. v. 5.

bar

band to Atia mother of Otavius. But in the mean A.R. 709.
time it was resolved that they should continue brifly Ant. C.
all the necessary preparations for war. And acually
Hirtius, though not well recovered from a disease he
had lately laboured under, set out a few days after at
the head of a body of troops to go and join young
Cafar, who had already commenced hostilities againt
Anthony, and had taken from him his elephants and
omne cavalry.
Another thing deliberated upon by the Consuls in
the Senate, the ift of January, conformable to a de-
cree of the 20th of December preceding, was the
rewards which were proper to be given to generals
and soldiers, who had declared in favour of the Re-
publick against Anthony. This affair was very deli-
cate, with regard to Otavius, whom the Senate nei-
ther cared to dilbblige, nor to recompence; because,
on the one hand they had need of him, and on the
other, it was dangerous to nourith his ambition and
too elevated hopes. Cicero was quite determined in
the affair, and advised them to invest him with the
title of Pro-pretor, to make him a Senator, and to
grant him the privilege of demanding offices several
)ears before the age prescribed by the laws. All this
passed, and, at the dfire of Philip, the honour of a
Ilatue was added.
What was mot singular in Cicero's harangue on
this subjea was, that he undertook to dissipate the
alarms, which were too well founded, of those who
were apprehensive that the son of Caesar would follow
his father's foot-steps. He extolled the attachment
of Otavius to the Senate; he affirmed that Brutus
and aflus had nothing to fear from that quarter,
and that he had sacrificed to the Republic all his par-
ticular re!entments. He went even so far as to be-
come surety for him to the Senate *. " I promise,"
said he, " I assure you, I engage to you, that OAavius

P Permntto, rcidpo, fpondeo, P. C. C. Cefarem talem emper fore
e:yem qualis hcdie fit, qualemque eum maxima efle velle & optare de-
ianus, Cc. Phil. v. 51.

F f 3 "will

A.R. 79." will always act as a good citizen, as he does now,
Ant. C. " and that he will follow the best maxims that we

' ,, could wish." But he promised a thing that no

ways depended upon himself; and the event, as is well
known, proved that he was too forward. He thought
himfeif, however, obliged to speak after this manner,
in order to eftablilh a confidence between the Senate
and Octavius, which he imagined to be necessary for
the good of affairs.

The Senate, at the fame time that they heaped h-
nours on young Csfar, ratified their promises made to
the troops, engaging to give them, after the vitory,
monev, fettlemcnts, and exemption from military
duty, both them and their children.

I make no mention of the encomiums and teftimo.
nies of approbation and esteem lavished upon Deci-
mus; the thing speaks itself.

But the Senate laid hold of the opportunity of try-
ing to fix the inconftancv of Lepidus, who had not
vet declared himself. He was father-in-law to Bru-
tu'-, which should have inclined him to the part of
the Republic. On the other hand, his vanity, or
fjoli.h ambition, was but too capable to determine
h.i:, as it afterwards happened, to join with Anthony
i: cFpreffing their liberty. They obliged him, there-
;ore, by decreeing him the honour of a gilded-ftatue,
w c h was to be placed upon the Orators Tribunal,
or w hatever pa:t of the City he should make choice
or. All this as done on a very extraordinary, and
friveoous pretext, excepting only one article, which
was really agreeable to the Senate, I mean the service
which Lepidus had rendered to Sextus Pompeius,
in order to refore him to his rights.

Though the partizans of Anthony had procured a
sixth decree of the Senate for a deputation, yet they
were not capable to draw up the inftruaions with
cic.T;:'. which the deputies were to be charged. They were
v. very severe, and carried an injunction to Anthony, tc

forbear molesing Decimus Brutus, the Consul elecL
to raise the siege of Modena; to make no devaftatior

ir

in the province; to retire on this fide the Rubicon, A.R. 709.
provided he did not approach nearer Rome than 200 An4t C.
miles *s not to inlift any soldiers; and, in hort, to
refer his interest and pretensions to the determination
of the Senate and People of Rome. Cicero, in giving
an account of these inftru&ions, fays, very justly,
That they were not so properly propositions of peace,
as express orders to a rebel. He foretold at the fame
time, in a very positive manner, that Anthony would
not obey them; and his prediction was verified to a
tittle.
Ser. Sulpicius, the best of the three deputies from cic. Plil.
the Senate, died upon arriving at Anthony's camp. ix.
He was ill before his departure from Rome, and it
was only out-of pure complaisance to the Senate, of
which he was one of the chief ornaments, that he ac-
cepted a commission which must en 'anger his life.
Of the two remaining deputies, Pifo and Philip,
one was a friend to Anthony, and the other a man of
oils charafter. By this means they acquitted them-
£eives of their charge like men who were not very zea-
ous. in the cause, contenting themselves with tranf-
;itting their orders in writing to Anthony.
Anthony had so little regard to this deputation, Ibid. iii.
that he caused the walls of Modena to be immediately1"'
dmn-olifhed, in presence of the deputies. He ex-
:end himself very bitterly against Cicero, whom he
alledged to be the author of the inftrudions, at which
he was very much offended. He complained of the Appian.
Senate, which used him ill in favour of her child Dio
for so he called Otavius). He declared that Dec.
Brutus hould pay for all the reft of Caesar's murderers;
lo that the death of that great man might not remain
Lnexpiated, at least by one victim. He did not allow
tie deputies to enter Modena, according to their or-
ders, to confer with Decimus. In fine, his answer
wS very haughty, and burthened with demands which
he wvas well assured they would never grant. It was

Mlore than ixty-fix leagues.

F f4 as

A. . 7c9. as follows, and began in a modest enough manner
At. C. ,, I renounce the government which was given me b)
c c.:- i. the people; I lay down the command of the army;
'"' I by no means refute to become private again; I for-

get every thing, and am reconciled to all the world."
But he adds intolerable conditions: " I demand that
you grant to my fix legions, and to my cavalry, and
troocs of guards, all the spoil they have made, and
the eates they are fettled in; that those to whom I
have given lands, in concert with Dolabella, may re-
main n poffeffcn of them; that whatever decrees my
coliegue and 1 have made with regard to ourselves,
following the Memoirs of Cfar for a pattern, hall
rem;in: in their full force; that no account of the
n-oney * v-hich was in the temple of Ops, shall be
demai;ded of me; that a pardon shall be granted to
all wiho are with me, for whatever they may have
cone a-ainti the law." In hort, he did not propose
to qaut his pretensions to Decimus's government, with-
out being very well recompenfed for it. " I give up,
laid he, the government of Cisalpine Gaul; but I
demand that of the Gauls lately conquered by Cafar,
togethcr with fix legions which shall be recruited out
of the army of D. Brutus; and I shall enjoy this go-
vernment as long as M. Brutus and C. Caffus hall
keep the governments of provinces, whether during
their Conrulihip, or in quality of Pro-consuls." One
may e-fil' observe, that the future Consulship of Bru-
tus ad Cassius was a contrivance of Anthony's to
,tie ;ialouif to Octavius, and to make him sensible,
t:at in cale of neceiLty, he might be reconciled to
h m.

Pifo a.n Philip vere o little interested in the cause
with which thcy were charged, that they reported the
anwe of -\nrhionv to tie Senate themselves, which
might ir'ced pais for a declaration of war. Cicero
put tis iterpretation upon it, and he proposed that

-7 } r-n-v amou:ntie to even hundred thousand Sefferces, as
h.. t .n i e.iru ie i t; ;.:;t i; , ear f.ve million and a half Sterling.

aRo-

a Roman, who in a Roman Colony besieged a Consul, A.R. 709g
appointed General of the Romans, should be de- Ant. C.
cared an enemy to the public. Anthony had still
friends enough in the Senate to ward off this blow.
A Tumult was declared, which was only a softer
word fubfsituted for that of war. As for the reft, all
the orders were given, and they acted in every re-
spec, as in a real war, and even a dangerous one.
They continued to raise both men and money. Arms
of all kinds were prepared: and all the citizens were
ordered, instead of the Toga, to wear the military
Garb, as in the time of the greatest danger. Every
thing wore the appearance of war, though at the fame
time they would not admit the name. Cicero's zeal Cic. Ph.
was so ardent, that he would not make use of the pri- xxxi.
vilege annexed to the consular dignity of wearing the
robe of peace on such emergencies. He put on, with
the other citizens, the warlike habit, to animate them
by his example to exclude all hope, and every propo-
fition of peace.
With the fame design he supported frongly the ro. i.
proposal made by the Consul Panfa, to honour the
memory of Ser. Sulpitius, who had died in the cha-
rater of Deputy from the Senate, and during the
time that he was employed in that office. Cicero
judged, very justly, that the honours decreed to Sul-
pitius would be a stain upon Anthony; and that the
lime monument which preserved the remembrance of
the deputy of the Senate, would bring to mind the
haughtiness with which Anthony had rejeced the de-
putation. He voted, therefore, to ere a statue to
uj!pitius, and his advice was followed, as appears by
the teftimonv of the lawyer Pomponius, who aflures por.p. de

, , . „ . '
. ,. r ~~Aurig.
ut that this statue remained in his time. Juris.
Cicero, in the mean time, could not hinder them
from renewing propositions for a reconciliation. An-
t.ony had always some friends at Romc. A little
while before two Printors, one of which was Ventidius;
who rendered himself so famous afterwards; one Tri-
ibne, and two designed Tribunes, had left the city

8 to

A.R. 7c9. to join Anthony, or to be of service to him in other

t. C parts of Italy. Calenus, who remained at Rorme

was not iefs useful to him, and it was by their repre-
fentations and those of Pifo, that the Senate delibe.
rated anew upon the means of terminating the uar-
rel, rather by treaty than by force of arms. anfa
supported them, and a new deputation was decreed,
comnpofed cf persons of consular dignity; in the num.
ber of which was Cicero himself. He durt not at
firil venture to oppose it, but in the next affemblyof
the Senate he laid open, in an oration, which is his
twelfth Philippic, the invincible reasons which obliged
c F.'-.;. hi to decline a commifflon of that nature. It is

certain that Cicero's pafion could by no means be
agreeable to Anthony ; and that it was only an illu
sion to think of negotiating a peace by means of his
mediation. But further, he found fault with the re
solution of the Senate, and undertook to prove that
confidering Anthony's character, his injustice, vio
lence, tyrannical spirit, and the train of abandone
men he had about him, they could not hope to ter
minate the affair by an accommodation; and that they
muf either overcome or perish. Cicero having thu
excused himlelf from going, the other Deputies re
mained likewise at Rome, and the resolution of th
Senate had no effect. A little time afterwards, th
Consul Panfa, having finished his business in th
citv, went to put him:elf at the head of the troops
levied by his orders, to make war againif Anthon)
conoint!v with his Collegue and young Cafar.

Cicero had tiill another attack to encounter in th
Senate, cn account of a letter from Lepidus, whic
exhorted them to peace. The representations of Le
pidus made thle itronger impression, from his havin
the command of a powerful army, and their havin
very good reason to distrust his attachment to the Re
publick. FluEtuating and irresolute as the Sena
was, Lepidus kept in with it, and at the fame tin
was in a good understanding with Anthony. H
even sent him supplies, but with a singular precautiol

f0

for he gave no orders to the general officer who corn- A. R. 709-
manded them, nor did he inform him which of the Ant. C.

43-
two parties he was tojoin. This officer, whose name
was Silanus, put a proper conftrution on the inten-
tion of the general, and marched his troops into An-
thony's Camp. Whether it was that this had not
happened at the time that Lepidus wrote to the Se-
nate, or that Cicero chore to connive at the diffimu-
lation of that artful man, he avoided, upon refuting
him in his thirteenth Philippic, to discover any dil-
content against him; nay, he everi goes so far as to
praise him. But he persists firmly in his opinion of
the impofibility of a peace. " What peace, fays
he, can you have with Anthony ? while there is no
punithment infliced upon that wretch which can
fitisfy the just vengeance of the Romans."
His zeal, which was always violent, was animated
by a letter of Anthony's, in which he saw himself per-
fonally attacked, in two different places. This letter,
which was wrote by Anthony to Hirtius and Odcavius,
before Panfa was arrived at the camp, had been sent
by Hirtius to Cicero. It is inserted at full length in
the xiiith Philippic: I shall here translate the greatest
part of it, because it is the most considerable specimen
remaining of Anthony's writings; and, beides, it is
very artfully turned to sow divisions among the parti-
zans of Caesar and Pompey, which were united against
him. - It begins thus: " The death of Trebonius,
when I heard of it, gave me no less grief than joy.
There is, doubtless, very good reason to rejoice, that

Cum hoc pax effe qu2a poteft ? cujus ne fpplicio quidem ulio
fatiari videtur polTe populue Romanus. Cc. Phil. xiii. zr.
t Cognita morte Trebonii, non plus gavifus fum, quam- dolui. De-
disle penas kceleratum cineri atque ofibus clariffimi viri, & appa-
r:iinienumen Deorum intra finem anni vertantis, aut jam foluto sup-
r;cio particidii, aut impendente ltandum eft. Holtem judicatur
i:,c termpore Dolabellam, e quod ficarium occiderit, & videri cario-
rern populo Romano filium fcurre quim C. Cafarem, patri; paren-
ter., ingemifceuldum eft. Acerbiffimum vera eft, te, A. Hirti, orna-
tum bcnleficiis Cafaris, & talem ab eo reli&um, qualem ipfe miraris,
& te, 6 puer, qui omnia ejus nomini debes, id agere ut jure damnatus
:t Dolabella, ut venefica haec liberetur ab obfidione, ut quam poten-
ti.fmus fit Cassius atque Brutus.

2 that

AR 709 that wretch hath fatisred, by his death, the mane
Ant. c. of that great man, whose life he had conipired against
43- and that the providence of the Gods has manifestec

itself before the end of the year, by the punifhmeni
which one of the parricides has already undergone,
and which threatens another of them. But that Do-
labella hould have been declared an enemy to the
publick for having killed an assassin, and that the
Ion of a buffoon (it is Trebonius, whom he marks
out by this scurrilous epithet) hould appear dearer to
the Romans than Cafar, the father of his country, is,
indeed, a lubject greatly to be lamented. But the
moll affeCting circumitance is, that you, Hirtius,
whom Cfar loaded with favours, and raised to a de-
gree of fortune, which is even furprifng to yourself;
and that you, likewise, young Otavius, who owe
every thing to his name, that both of you should use
your influence to make the condemnation pronounced
against Dolabella appear lawful, and be put in exe-
cution; and that that deceitful man (meaning Deci-
mus) whom I now keep shut up in Modena, should
be delivered from the siege; and that Caflus and
Brutus should acquire a formidable power."

Anthony proved what he advanced, by enume-
rating all the false measures which he alledged had
been taken by Hirtius and Oavius, against the in-
terefi of their party. The firit that he mentions is,
their having made choice of Cicero , one of the van-
qui.hed, for their Counlellor and Chief; and he ends
the whole detail of their conduct with this exclama-
tion. i" What could Pompey himself do more, was
he to return to life; or his son, if he was at Rome?"

He adds: " You t tell me that I must not hope
for peace, if I do not susser Decimus to go out of
Modena; or, if I do not furnish him with provisions.
Is this the request of those veterans whom you have
* Vijtum Cceronem ducem habutlis.
jt Negatis pacern fieri poite, nili aut emifero Brutum, aut frumento
jivero. Qti:d hoc placetne veteranis itis ? quibus adhuc omnia in-
trra f-urt; quc'r.am vos affentationibus & venenatis muneribus e-

pre-

prevailed upon, and who, nevertheless, are still unde- A.R. 79.
termined ? As for you, you have entered into engage- Ant"
.
ments; you have fold yourselves; and the flatteries
you have listened to, together with the poisoned pre-
sents which you have received, leave you no longer
at liberty to draw back.

" You tell me that there has been mention made
in the Senate for peace, but I do not expect any rea-
fonable, or moderate propositions from that quarter.
It * belongs more properly to you to confider which
is the belt plan, and the most useful flep to be taken;
whether to revenge the death of Trebonius, or that
of Cafar; whether we ought to ruin one another in
order to revive the cause of Pompey, which has been
so many times traversed and subdued, or whether we
ought not to unite ourselves, in order to prevent our
becoming the sport of our common enemies, who
will be equal gainers by the ruin of either your forces
or mine. Hitherto fortune has spared herself this
fpetacle, and was not willing to fee two members or
the fame body, or two armies of the fame party,
fight against each other, at the instigation of Cicero,
who endeavours to set them together by the ears.
Doubtless, he ought to elltee himself very happy for
having imposed upon you, by means of the fame
titles and honours by Which he boaled to have im-
posed upon Cefar."

Anthony frther positively aflured them, that Le-
pidus and Plancus were both of his party; but in this
he went too far, at leat with regard to Plancus:
However, it is scarce to be doubted but that he was
on good terms with both of them.

Vos potiis animadvertite utrum fit elegantius & partibus utilius,
Trelin ii mortem perfequi, an Cfaris: & utrum lit rquius, concur-
rere no; quo faciliits revivifcat Ponipeialorumn caufa toties jugulata,
an conlfetire, ne ludibrio firnmus ininicis: qubus utri noltrim ceci-
crllnt, lucro futuruim. Quod peitaculum adhuc ipla F.rtuna vitavit,
re videret unius corporis duas acies, laniita Cicerone, dmicantes
qui ultue eo felix et, ut iilderu ornamentis dece2e-it vos, quibus de-
'ptur Cfarem gloriatus e;t.

lecan

A. R. 7o9. Mean while his final resolution was this: " IfE*
Ant. C. Gods, fays he, favourable as 1 hope to the juftnefso
41.

my intentions, grant me happy success, life will b
very pleasant and agreeable to me. If it happen
otherwile, I enjoy, beforehand, with infinite fatisfac
tion, the idea of the punilhment which you must un
avoidably meet with. For since the partizans oi
Pompey, though they are vanquished, carry their in.
folence so far, what will they do if they become
conquerors ? I shall leave you to make an experiment
of this."

But not chufing to take leave of them in such harfl
exprefons, he adds an offer of a reconciliation:

Whatever iuftice + (fays he) my friends have
done me, I can fill forget what I have suffered by it,
provided they can repent what they have done, and
are ready to join with me in avenging the death of
Cefar."

This letter furnished flofe to whom it was direced
with agreeable matter for refection. It is uncertain
what eect it produced on the mind of Ilirtius, who
died oon after. But as to cdavius, he made too
good uile cr it, as will appear in the iequel.

In the rean time it produced no visible change in
the conduet of the three Chiefs, who upported the
cause c the Senate. It seems that Hirtius and Panfa
though it recr-farv to chastise Anthony, in order to
oblige him to re:pect the orders of the Senate and
the Las ; and that O'tavius did not think that he
could 'curely treat with him tii! he had first revenged
that co-.tc: pti h ad ihewn towards him, and made
him ienrie that he was not a child, but a man, quite
ripe \with ri.-ard to prudence, and very firm in the
execution or what he iad resolved. The winter alone
* 5 me rec:, C:fl)bus iu.ctem dii i;nmortales, ut fpero, adjuverint,
. .,ih iben:er. .in au: r.l a;i.;i i;:e rtum manet, prTcipio gaudia
flp;iicci, u!m el: rum. N.Si2e i viai Ponmpiani tain insolentes
lur.:, V: S
q..u! s qmeisi £ats..:at, vos D:;.i experiemini.
+ D;ni;ue :unm:nai udci i :nli ipue;ct .uc, ur meorum injurias ferre
'ai.i.n, si au obiv:,ci in: ipi feci-.i, .:: ui.:.i para:i fi.t una na-
bi:cii in i r:':s m ;-'-:m.

hin-

hindered them from ating. Oavius was with his A. R. 709.
army at the Forum Cornelii which is now called Imola: Ant. C,
Hirtius occupied * Claterna in the fame province: And
Panfa, who remained at Rome during some months at
the beginning of the year, raised troops by force. As
for Anthony, he continued to block up Decimus in
Modena. And in this manner was the bad season for
fighting occupied.

As oon as it was possible to take the field, Hirtius Appian.
and Otavius knowing that the scarcity became very Dio.
pressing in Modena, marched with a.defign to attempt
the relieving it. Upon the march they took poffelf-
sion of Bologna, which opened its gates to them. But
when they approached near the place besieged, they
found themselves stopped by a little river called
tScultena, the banks of which Anthony had lined
with troops. It was not possible for them to pass it:
They only gave notice to Decimus of teir arrival by
signals; but as he returned no answer, they made use
of a diver, who swimming under water entered the Frontin.
town, and carried to the besieged the news of the Stratag.
succours, graved on a thin plate of lead, which they ii. 13 &
tied to his arm. They conveyed also Salt and other in.x. 37.
provisions into Modena, by the fame way of the river.
The besiegers having observed it made use of nets
to catch them, which effe&tually hindered them from
fending any more. But they found no method of
tlopping a particular kind of couriers, which kept up
a correspondence between the besieged and the army
dcefined for their relief. These were Pigeons, to the
necks of which they fastened letters, and after hav-
ing kept them shut up in a dark-place without meat
i o:- bme time, they let them fly. As oon as they
found themselves at liberty they direced their flight
towards a place where they observed grain, which
they had taken care to put upon the high-ground;
and thus they carried and brought back several im-
portant advices.

Qaderna.
t Le Panaro.

There

A R. 709. There was nothing else remarkable happened till
Ant. C. the arrival of Panfa; excepting only that the Pretor
Appia. Vcntidius, whose leaving Rome I have before taken

notice of, having advanced to join Anthony with two
legions which he had raised in Cfar's colonies, was
hindered by Hircius and Oftavius. He therefore re-
tired to Picenum, where he raised a third legion,
waiting an opportunity of making use of his forces for
the service of his friend and protector.

The fourteenth of April Panfa was to arrive at the
camp of Hirtius, with four legions of new raised
troops. At his approach both armies put themselves
in motion. Hirtius detached the Martial Legion with
his Guard or Pratorian Cohort, together with that of
Oavius, in order to secure the march of his Collegue.
Anthony, to prevent their joining, marched from the
camp himself, leaving his brother Lucius to command
there in his absence; and took two of the best Legi-
ons, two Prstorian Cohorts, his own and that of Si-
lanus, which had been sent him by Lepidus, as I be-
fore observed, besides bome cavalry and light-armed
troops, and posted himself near the Forum Gallorum,
now called Castel Franco.
cic. ad As soon as the Martial Legion, which had quitted
F-:. . the service of Anthony to join young Cafar, perceived
fn''i;i. the troops of the contrary party, it was not possible

to keep them within bounds. Hatred is never ftron-
ger than against those whom you have left, and by
whom you know you are looked upon as a rebel.
Panfa was obligd to follow the motion of this Le-
gion, and to engage in a general action, almost in
spite of himself. I hall not offer to enter upon a
detail of this engagement, which was very bloody.
The Pratorian Cohort of Cfar was almost entirely
cut to pieces. The Martial Legion suffered likewise
very much; and Panfa received two wounds, the fe-
cond of which was so considerable, that he was obliged
to leave the field of battle, and was carried to Bo-
logna. The loss was not much less on Anthony's
fde; however, he had the advantage, for which he

was

was particularly obliged to the cavalry, which was A.R. 7?o
extremely good. But attempting to cross the camp . :.
where the vanquished were retreated, he met with a
repulse.

When he was returning, Hirtius, who upon the
news of what had pasTed, was arrived with two Legi-
ons, met him in the very place where the former battle
was fought; and falling on his troops, which were
greatly fatigued, he easil'y defeated them. Thus the
conquerors were either cut to pieces, or put to flight
in their turn. Anthony got back again to his camp,
by the favour of the night, with the remains of his
soldiers. Hirtius took two standards and fixty-fix co-
lours from the enemy.
In his absence, his camp was attacked by L. Anto-
nius. Oavius, who was left there with a handful of
men, made nevertheless a good defence; for having
obliged the assailants to retire with loss, he by this
means became a sharer in the glory of the day, which
though not at all decisive, yet, however, did honour
to the party of the Senate.
Anthony afterwards reproached Ocavius that he Suet.A:ig.
had fled on this occasion, and did not appear again'
for two days after the battle, without his armour and
his horse. But the testimony of an enemy is liable to
exception. Odtavius was praised in a letter to Hirtius,
quoted by Cicero in full Senate, as having given proofs
of great courage. The account which I have given cic. Pl!l.
of the aifair, is a faithful tranfiation of Cicero's words, xlv. zS.
in his xivth Philippic. But granting that account not
to be literally jut, yet I cannot perluade myself that
itcan be ablblutely false.
The advantage gained over Anthony was extolled
beyond all measure. Cicero voted to ordain festivals
for fifty days to render thanks: A very great honour,
and refpeting the number of days, exceeded every
t'iing which had passed before with regard to Pompey
2a (alar. Hle adviled, betides, that they Ihould
inve each of the three Chiefs with the title of Impe-
rao!, as if it had been for a glorious victory, and that
VOL. IX. G g a mag-

A..R.7cg. a magnificent monument should be erected at the ex-

pence f the Republic, for all those who had been
killed in the baitle. This was a very judicious and
laudable prcpo:-.:i, as it preserved to the fathers, mo-
thers, wives, children, and brothers of the soldiers
who were slain in defence of the publick Cause, those
rewards which would have been given to themselves,
had they furvivtd.
Dio. Mean while, for all this pomp of congratulation
Appin. 0

Ap and triumph, Decimus was not delivered, and An-

thony fill pressed the fege. Hirtius and Otavius
were forced to give Anthony battle again, and attack
his intrenchments. They had penetrated a good way
when Hirtius was killed, fighting with great bravery,
Oclavius beinr left alolne, gave evident proofs of his
good conduct and courHge. He kept poffeflion of
the enemy's camp for flme ime; but at last Anthony,
with redoubled ert, obliged them to retire. He
S-e.Au. made his retreat, however, in good order; and it is
Fio-r.;.a. reported of him, that a fiandard-bearer having given

him the fiandard wlhen he was dying, he took it upon
his shoulders, and v.ith this honourable load, wounded
and covered v-ith blood, he returned glorious to his
ie. ad camp, having all the advantage on his li'e-: Decimus
Brut. I-. . fared the honour with hin, y a ally which he made

during the engagement. It is not at all to be doubted
but Anthony pf.Fered greatly by this last action.
This is confsrmed by thc rci!!utjn he took to raise
the S.egee and gain the Al;s as lain as possible. But
though e was overcome, he had still ofme resource
left. He trusted rruch to the friendlhip of Lepidus
end Plancos, and he as sure of the three Legions
which Ventidius comaniaded in Picenum. His next
bunefs then was to put himself in a condition of re-
ceiving the succours o is friends, by means of which
he hoped to become sooner more powerful and more
for;r idab!e to his enemies than before.

He would have found it dig;cult, however, to
h.'e received the advan:age of thcfe reinforcements,
:ha1 C:t-avUi pribed him withut delay. Ti

youngl

younig but artful politician, who was always steady A.R. 709..
in pursuing the interest of his ambition, purposely al- A. C.
lowed his enemy time to retire. He was afraid of
serving too well the party in which he was engaged,
being persuaded, not without reason, that if he ruin-
ed Anthony, the Senate would next endeavour to ruin
himself.
This whole intrigue is very difficult to be unra-
veiled, for.want of sufficient memoirs that might be i
depended on. Two things, however, are very cer-
tain; the one, that the Senate desired earnestly to re-
establish the government of the Republic ; the other,
that Otavius wanted entirely to destroy it, and raise
to himself, on the ruins of Liberty, a power refem-
bling that of his great uncle. By an inevitable confe-
quence of this contrariety of views, they mutually
distrusted one another, and the neceftity alone of sub-
duing Anthony their common enemy, had re-united
them. After Anthony was reduced to retreat from
before Modena, and was no more in a condition to
give umbrage to any one of them, the division, which
was only suspended between the two parties, was ready
to break out. The Senate, believing that they had
no longer need of Oavius, neglected him, and
strove to mortify him. And Ocdavius made use of
this pretext to break his engagements with the Senate,
and to execute without reserve that design which he
had always kept in view.

This is in general the truth of the affair, which no
difflmulation could render obscure, because it was
sufficiently evinced by facts. But that which has very
much darkened all the account of there times is,
That both parties strove to conceal their measures;
and as OV'avius at last became the Chief, under the
title of Augustus, and even transmitted his power to
his successors ; the historians under the firfi Cafars,
were permitted to give inflances of the Senate's ingra-
titude, but by no means to expose Odavius. And how
could it be expected that the common historians Tac Ann.
iould dare to speak the truth, since T. Livius him-iv. 34.

- E pift.
G g 2 lel ¢xix0

A-R7C9 self, whom Augustus called a partizan of Pompey,

43 mentions, as a true motive, (if the author of the

Abridgment understood his meaning) what was only
a pretence; and supposes that the unjust proceedings
of the Senate were tme caule which determined 6ta-
vius to usurp the Consulship.
Ta. Ann. Tacitus, who was not only a man of an open cha.

rader, but wrote in a time of liberty, under the go.
vernment of one of the best Princes to be met with
in history, has traced a faithful plan of the conduc
s:Iet.Ag. of Octavius, which 1 have exacly copied. Suetnius

also tells his mind very freely, but both of them ex-
p-els tnemfclves only in general terms. Appian and
Dio, w.ho entered more into particulars, have extract-
ed ;ecir hilories from sources infeced with flattery;
and, c niequently, ought not to be rashly believed.
Thus it frequently happens that we find them con-
tradicted by the mall authentic remains of the times
we ae now speaking of. That is to fay, some letters
of Cicero and his friends, especially the two Bruti.

As I do not intend to load this work with differ-
rations, v.hich belong properly to the learned, I all
no: disculs those points which I imagine have deceived
these two Greek riters. I Ihall look upon what
thev have wrote as partial to Otavius, compared with
th;^e pieces which we have on the opposite fide, and
thus I shall endeavour to unravel the truth to my
reader. But I return to my fubje&.

Decimus had no sooner got over his fear of An-
thcnv, than he began to be afraid of O&avius. To
clear up his suspicions he desired a conference with
him ; and it appears, by the manner in which he ex-
x:. a prcffes himfeif in a letter to Cicero, that he believed
r m. . he had good reason not to be displeased with it. But

Ocaavius, who was much more artful than he, de-
ceived him.

In the mean time Panfa died in Bologna of the
wounds which he received at the battle of Castel
Franco. Finding there was no hopes of recovery, he
f.nt for Oavius, and, if you believe Appian, re-

vealed

vealed to him the plot of the Senators, and their de- A.R. 709,
sign to make the Chiefs of Cafar's party destroy each Ant. c.
other. He added, that his view, and that of his
Collegue in making war against Anthony, was only to
humble him, in order to force him to a reconciliation
with the sons of his benefactor. He ended, by in-
forming him that he gave him up the two Legions,
the Martial and the fourth, and that he would cause
all the new raised troops to be sent to Decimus.

This last circumitance is very certain ; and after
the death' of Panfa, there troops were distributed ac-
cording to the plan above-mentioned. As to the in-
tentions of Panfa and Hirtius, they might possibly -
be such as Appian supposes them; but it it was so,
it was furprizing that Cicero had no suspicion of it;
and in the letters which he wrote, both during their
Confuliip, and after their death, he frequently
praises them, never in the least fufpets their fidelity,
and finds no fault with them on any other account,
than want of ativity and prudence on certain occa-
sions. Besides, their whole condu&, after the death
of Cafar, shewed them to be men most certainly at-
tached to his memory, but enemies to the violences
and tyranny of Anthony and his party. If they had
any secret designs, they can only be guessed at.
In short, in a time of factions and troubles, all
forts of rumours find credit with those whose pre-
judices are flattered. Thus, while Appian regards
Hirtius and Panfa as devoted to Oavius, this last
has been accused by others as the author of theirTa. Ann.
death, as having occasioned Hirtius to be killed in . ,,.
the battle by his own soldiers, and as having engaged Suet. Aug.
Panla's Physician to poison his wounds. These accu- "'
atlons have never been proved, and we have even a
letter of Brutus's, in which he justifies Panfa's Phyfi-
cian. We only fee by such extraordinary reports, Cc. ad
what some people believed a young ambitious man, Brut i. 6,
such as Otavius, to be capable of.
The fatal death of the two Consuls was a severe
blow to the Republic, which found itself all at once

Gg3 de.

A.R. s. denrived of its Chiefs. Their bodies were carried to

4'3t.t Rome and rnag-ficently interred, and their deaths

greatly lamented by the public. All orders of the
State seemed to take a hare in the concern; and it
has been reporred that the Cryers, who officiated at
the futneral ceremony, refused their wages on this me-
lancholy occaficn. The grief, in the mean time, was
greater and more sincere amongst the people, than
amlongif thor a a. the head of affairs. Hirtius and
Panfa had obcrved a mean between the two parties,
which could neither be entirely satisfactory to the Se-
nate or O(itavi:s. Octavius had found them too
much a.:;;ched to the Senate, and the' Senate too
lukewa.;. in th cause of liberty. Cicero hints at
this lail in iFa.'ir. of their death: " We t have
1 it two good Conruls," fays he, " but they were
only good."
pio. 'I e next t-.ing that engaged the attention of those

' o were zealous for the Republic, was how to
i-.' c the best uife of Anthony's disgrace, which, at
fir.L. lcv locl;ed upon as quite compleat. As soon
rs t c heard the news that the siege of Modena was
rai'-d, t'lyv again put on the robe of peace in the city,
as i the ar hadl been entirely at an end, and or-
Ci:. ' d ird feivas ftor sixty days. Anthony, and all

F". thF, .ho had ?:nd hiim were declared enemies to
.-. . .:he i'.:..ic, r.;r: i .,'s relolved that they hould pur-

It.e t'-rnn b:-i'.!! tii i:eyl had compinleated their ruin.
Ar;- *. Inn th n-ea time, they appointed a commiflon to

insz-e; into the xl-,.ie co.nduLt of Anthony during his
Cc,;l:ii p, and to rcpai all the injustice for which
he was t-.rned, bo-h towards the Republic and parti-
cul r i--c';ns. IThe t::- which they proposed by an-
IullinT hir crders v-.-., that this counter-blow must
wekstn (.efiar' Decrees, by which he thought himlelf
aur-o rized in all he had done.
c-. 'c- At such a critical coniuncture, while nobody durst
p,:-. \vi: c.!l himliflf a friend to Anthony, and those who had

t Cn.,;.:' duos, bonos cT-idem, fed duntaxat bonos, amifinmi"
Cic. Cad 1rut. i, ;.

beell

been the mofi obliged to him abandoned him- and A-R. 79.
joined his enemies; Atticus, in spite of his intimate At. C.
conneAions with Cicero and Brutus, hewed himself a
faithful friend to him in dilgrace. He proteced
Fulvia his wife, who was attacked on all fides by cre-
ditors, and persecuted with a thousand injuries in or-
der to rob her of all flhe had. He secured his chil-
dren, who were in danger of their lives. And it can-
not be laid, as Corn. Nepos very well observes, That
in all this he afted with the least selfish view. For at
that time there was no manner of appearance that An-
thony could ever recover himself, every body believ-
ing that he was irrecoverably ruined.

The rigid Republicans, who followed to a tittlecic. ad
the maxims and suggestions of Brutus, were no le' Fad. Xr.

_~:) ' &ad Brut.
artive to depress young Cefar, than to ruin Anthony. Appian.
As they had the upper hand at that time in the Se- Dio.
nate, all the honours were granted to Decimus. He
was charged with the pursuit of Anthony, and the bat-
tle of Modena, by which he was delivered, happen-
ing accidentally to fall on his birth-day, it was or-
dered that that day hould be marked with his name
in the public Fafti : In fine, under pretence of forne
advantages gained by him, several months before,
over the nations of the Alps, they decreed him a tri-
um;ph. On the contrary, Cicero, who kept moreCic.ad
within bounds, having proposed to grant Octavius Fal.XI
the honour of an Ovation, had almofc the whole Se-
nate a ainft him. And what shewed very plainly
their dcfign of weakening young Cefar, was their at-
tempt to take away from him the Martial and fourth
Legions, and put them under the command of Deci-
mus. But the Senators succeeded no farther in this,
than only to discover their ill will towards him. The
Legions were too well pleated with the general they
had made choice of, to be prevailed upon to leave
him. But the Senate did not content themselves with
that; they even carried the affair so far as to affront
Octavius.

G g 4 Their

A. R. 7o. Their next business was, to bestow on the vitori.
An C. ous Legions those rewards they had promised at the

beginning of the war. This was looked upon as an
affair of to great consequence, that in order to raise
Cic. ad money, the' loaded with a tax the city of Rome it-
Fa:. Xr. feli, which had been exempted from it ever since
Br,,t.i.s. the triumph of Paulus Emilius, conqueror of Persia,
P:. -.- and which submitted with great reluctance to a bur-
C;c de den it had not felt for the space of 120 years before.
c(L. ii. 75. They named fix Commissioners to distribute there re-

wards; and one would think that it was very natural
to have put the officers of those troops in the number.
But so ar from this, it was said that those who were
at the head of the army could not be named for this
office. They chose rather to exclude Decimus than to
be under a necessity of admitting OCavius.

This resolution was also taken contrary to the ad-
vice of Cicero, who was one of the commiflioners.
He infiied in favour of the two generals, but was not
hearkened to. His prudence was looked on as a felfifhh
piece of policy, and brought upon him afterwards
verv fmiar reproaches from Brutus. On the other
hand he was, at the fame time, exposed to the ill-will
of the veterans, who looked upon him as favouring
the murderers of Caesar.

The veterans were in the right; and he happened
to drop an expression at this time, which perhaps cost
him his life. In * speaking of Otavius he said, that
he could not help praising and honouring the young
r.an: he adds a third phrae which in the Latin bears
an equivocal sense, and may equally signify " to ele-
" v-a'e, or rid himrnell of him." This expreflion came
to the ears of O&tavius, who said he would take care
not to be elevated in the manner Cicero intended he
ihould.

In short, he actually prepared to lay aside the mask,
and break off with the Senate. It may indeed be

' JIrun Caav-rem nlhil fan die te queftm, nifi dicum quod dice-
ret t dxi; c, laudandum adoielcentem, ornanduni, tollendum; fe
non cormim:.rum ut tolli pofiit. D. BErT. ad Cic. xi. ad Fam. 2o.

said

said that he was in a manner forced to it, as it' mani- A. I. 79
feftly appeared that they proposed to crush Cfar's Ant.
party, and to make the enemies of his name and me-
mory triumph. The general command at sea given
to Sextus Pompeius; the formidable power which
Brutus and Cassius authorized by the decrees of the
Senate had acquired; the honours accumulated upon
Decimus; the indifference which they hewed for
Octavius, after Anthony was no longer to be feared;
all this prognofticated to Caesar's heir, not only ob-
ftacles, with regard to his ambitious projets, but
even dangers fatal to his person. He had then good
reason to distrust the Senators, and the Senators had
reason to distrust him. Their reciprocal interests were
directly contrary; and as it is interest which governs
men, especially those who have the management of
great affairs, the enmity between them became irre-
concileable. It was necessary that either the Senate
Should be crushed to pieces, or else that the ambitious
Otavius hould perilh.
This he had foreseen from the very beginning. Su.it.Au.
For by his plan the authority of the Senate must be '
destroyed. And he owned this in some mealtre him-
self, feeing he made a glory of it, through his whole
life, that he had always had in view the revenging
the death of his adoptive father, which could not be
executed while the Senate preserved any authority.
He dissembled at first, that he might not have both
the Senate and Anthony to struggle with at the fame
time. He even puihed his diffrmulation so far as to
agree to release one of Cxfar's murderers, and afred
:is part so well in this war, that Cicero tefrifies in lhis cic. ad
behalf, that there was no fault to be found with the Brut.l.io.
manner in which he served his party.
After Anthony's defeat he suspended his activity at
once; he took no advantage of the victory, and this
Was the first symptom he gave of his secret intentions.
But this was ftil equivocal, since the Senate charged
Decimnus, and not Odtavius to pursue Anthony. As
fr the reft he kep, himself quiet, and had patience

for

A.R. 79. for some time ; being willing without doubt to obtain
An. c. ome specious pretence againfl the Senate, which

hfewed now no more respect for him, and to seem to
have been abandoned-and offended by the Senators,
before he Should abandon them, and declare himsel£
their enemy.
vil. n. He was not long in finding the pretence which he
6-. wanted, and the Senators took care to furnish him
ID.c> with it. Being fill fond of the proje& of drawing

from him the troops which acknowledged him for
their chief, they ordered the Deputies which they sent
to the army to diftribure the rewards, to speak to the
soldiers when Oavius was not present. After the
Deputies arrived, and had signified their orders to the
young general, he declared that he would not in the
least hinder them from doing what was enjoined
them; but he signified to them, at the fame time,
that they would find it a needless trouble, and that he
was very sure that the soldiers would neither hearken
to them nor give them any aniwer unless he was pre-
sent. In this he advanced nothing but the truth, and
doubtless he had taken his measures before. The
Deputies be-ing returned, without having performed
any thing, OC:avius embraced this opportunity of lay-
in, open to his troops the whole management of the
Senate, and a design which was formed of owing a
diTcniion betv.-t:en the soldiers and their general. Hi!
ic:ccure as received with great applause, and the
attempt which had been made to deprive him of his
ary.-, confirm e the affcEtions of his troops towards
him.
-.: n. In the mean time he made preparations to approach

towards Arthony, but did not enter directly into
negotiation with him. He began to caress very muc
the prisoners, both officers and soldiers, which he had
in his power, receiving into his army all such as were
willing to engage with him, and allowing to the ref
the liberty or returning to their general. Ventidiu
had marched c of Picenum, in order to join An
:',rony and Noh.inrg could have been more easy thar

foi

for Ofavius to have cut them to pieces in their march. A.R. 709-
But initead of that, when he knew that they were A.43
near his camp, he sent to invite them to join his
party or, if Ventidius rather chose it, he would al-
low him to continue his march unmolested towards
Anthony, and he charged him to reproach him with
his ignorance of their mutual interest. Ventidius
made a proper use of this permission, and was not
wanting to acquit himself faithfully of his mesage.
This conduc of Ostavius sufficiently declared his in-
tentions. For an officer, one of the prisoners, called
Decius, taking leave of him to return to Anthony,
and demanding of him an explanation of his senti-
ments: " I have done enough, answered Otavius,
, for intelligent men. To such as are weak and blind,
" nothing is sufficient."

He further explained himself in letters to Lepidus
and Pollio, with whom he had no difference, and
who, till that time, appeared to remain neuter. He
represented to them, " That all the chiefs of Cefar's
party ought to unite together, in order to check the
power of his father's murderers, and also for their
own safety. That without this it was greatly to be
feared, that they should all be ruined, one after ano-
ther, as had just happened to Anthony, by an effe&
of his too great boldness, presumption, and obstinacy.
That it was right to keep in with the Senate, and to
acknowledge its authority, without neglecing them-
selves in the mean time, and taking proper precau-
tions against the dangers which threatened them."
Oftavius concluded with desiring them to commu-
nicate these reflections to Anthony, and to engage
him to give attention to them.

Lepidus was very trongly inclined to conform his
conduct to the advice of Otavius. But as to Pollio,
if we may judge of his dispositions by the three letters
which we have of his upon the motion above-men-
tioned, and even by the fierceness of his character, a
republican in his heart, and full of esteem for Cicero;
though he preserved some refpet for the memory of

Cafar,

AR. 79. Cefar, he hewed hmfelf fully determined to ai
Ant. C. the Senate against Anthony. But his being removed
41.

to the furthermost corner of Spain, did not allow him
to have any harf in the decision of that affair, or to
have it in his power to wait for it.

Octavius, besides his general views which regarded
the whole party, had at that time a particular one with
regard to himself; this was to arrive at the Consul-
snip, void by the death of Hirtius and Panfa. This
supreme dignity was very capable of tempting an am-
Pat. Cic. bitious young man. Besides, he judged it a kind of
'o. *^ proteEtion absolutely necessary for him in his present

situation. He saw himself as it were standing alone,
an enemy of Anthony, not well assured of the difpo-
fitions of the other chiefs of Cazear's party, and ob-
noxious to the Senate. The Consulship, if he could
obtain it, would certainly fortify him, and add to his
arms the support of the Laws, and of the public Au-
thority. But the difficulty was, how to succeed. He
first addressed himself to Cicero, who allowed himself
to be persuaded to assist him, in a demand so con-
trary to the rules and interest of the republican
party.

This is a part of Cicero's life which gives the
greatest handle for censure. It mul be owned, that
he had a violent inclination towards Otavius, who
had insinuated himself into his good graces by the
most flattering caresses, and who feigned to put his
confidence entirely in him, and to make him his only
counsellor. I am of opinion, however, that whatever
c . 3. Cicero did before that in favour of Cafar's heir might
B-' :. hbe justified, and that the reasons he makes use of to

defend himself aainft the reproaches of Brutus on
this fubjert, have a great deal of weight.

Neceffirv had forced him to throw himself into the
arms of Odavius, in the urgent danger which threat-
ened the city and the Republick when Anthony march-
ed his Legions from Brundisium to Rome. Young
Calfar was then plainly the deliverer of the Senate;
and upon this occasion the whole Senators agreed with

Cicro,

Cicero, to load him with honours of all kinds. But A. R. o09
* I do not know how it happens, fays Cicero to Bru- Ant. C
tus, that we are more ready to grant liberally in the
moment of danger, thap to make any acknowledg-
ment when it is over." After raising the siege of
Modena, the Senate changed its condut entirely with
regard to Oavius. But Cicero did not vary from
the system he had embraced. He proposed that they
should decree to the conqueror the little Triumph,
and alledged that that advice was no less prudent,
than conformable to the laws of gratitude. He did
not explain himself any further. But independent of
other reasons which he might possibly have had, it is
certain that if the Senate had been complaisant enough
to Ofavius, to grant him an honour of no great con-
sequence, he would have thought himself more obliged
to have declined making an irregular and dangerous
demand of the Consulship.

It was upon occasion of this demand that Cicero
allowed himself to be made a tool of; and, which
made it the more inexcusable, through ambition and
van:ty. The young and artful Otavius proposed
to him that they hould demand the Consulship to-
gether, giving him to understand, that he himself
would be contented with the simple title and honour,
leaving the power entirely to Cicero. He added, that
if he desired that high office, it was only to have an
opportunity of laying down his arms honourably, as
he had demanded a triumph from the fame motive.
It is difficult to comprehend how Cicero should be
deceived by such a palpable piece of artifice, if it was
not that the predominant passion frequently blinds
men of the most penetrating genius. Plutarch agrees
with Appian in this affair; and it is certain that it was
currently reported at that time, that Cicero was to be
mauie Consul, for Brutus in a letter compliments him Brut. ad
upon it. This old and wife statesman, imposed on by cic I. +.
* Sed n cro quomodo facilis in timore benigni, qal in vitoria
gra;i reperimur.

a young

A. R. 7c9. a young man not yet twenty, made the whole Senate
Ant. c. wtnefles of the trick which was put upon him. He

represented, " That the Republick could scarce put
confidence in any of the generals which commanded
the armies in the neighbourhood of Italy, and who
ated like independents, making treaties among them-
feives for their proper interests, without any regard
to the service of the State. Consequently it behoved
the Senate to attach itself to Ocavius, whom hitherto
it had regarded but very little; and that it was necef-
fary to regain him by means of some honours, left be-
ing irritated and in arms it might be more difficult to
rettrain him v.thin proper bounds, than if he was in
the city and vested with the Consulship. That after
all they could appoint a kind of manager and tutor for
him, under the name of collegue, and make choice
cfone of the old Senators to direct his counsels." This
discourse did not impose upon any. The friends of
Brutus presently discovered in it Cicero's weakness,
and made a jest of it. They had no mind to consent
to the preferment of Cfar's son, and to put it in his
power to revenge the death of his father.

This artifice of Oc&avius had not its intended
effectt; and as he was not powerful enough to subdue
the Senate hinmelf, it is very probable that he would
not have ucceeded in ulurping the Consulship, if
the juncion es Lepidus and Anthony had not caused
new alarms to the Republick, and quite discouraged
it.
clc. a1 The Senate, at the beginning of the troubles, had

F. ordered Lepidus and Plancus to come from Gau
P'lncusad with their armies to the assistance of the Republick
Cic. L x. If there two enerals had faithfully and pun&uall]
ad Fai. obeyed this order, Anthony must have been infallibli

ruined. But, in the firit place, they were quarrellinl
with each other, and consequently little dilpofed t
act in conjunction ; and it was with ome difficult
that Juventius Laterenfis, Lepidus's lieutenant, aver
zealous citizen for the cause of liberty, prevailed a
last in part to remove this obstacle, by negotiatin

betwee
2

between them a seeming reconciliation. In the second A R. 7O09
place, their politicks made them both wait the fuc- Ant.c
cess, before they would determine; with this differ- 3'
ence, that Lepidus favoured Anthony's party, while
Plancus, on the other hand, inclined more towards
the Senate. From all this there resulted an indolent
condu&c, and affeced delays, which prolonged the
affair so much, that the quarrel was terminated in
Italy by the raising the siege of Modena, and by the
flight of Anthony, without their having in the least
contributed to it, during the time that they were still
in Gaul. This event put an end to Plancus's equivo-
cations, and obliged him to engage heartily against
the unfortunate Anthony. In the letters which he
wrote after that time to Cicero, he speaks in the fame
flyle concerning the Republick as Cicero himself; he
does not spare to give Anthony and his party the most
odious epithets; and he passed the Ifer to join Lepi-
dus, who was encamped at the Pons Argentorum,
upon a river of the fame name, on this fide the town
called Forum Voconii. But when he came near it, he
understood that Lepidus had received Anthony into
his camp. In this manner was that affair condu&ed.
Odavius, as I have said, did not pursue Anthony,
who had gained two days march upon Decimus; for
he marching in a regular manner, could not make
such quick progress as flying troops, whose only care
it is to cfcape the enemy. It is incredible what An-
thony suffered in this flight. There was a prodigious
famine in his army, especially at the passage of the
Alps; even so great as to make them endeavour to
convert into nourishment the barks of trees, and to
eat animals for which nature has the greatest abhor-
rence. The soldiers nevertheless suffered this great
calamity with courage, because their general himself
set them an example; and they saw that man, who
was accustomed to a luxurious diet, and the most
delicious wines, drink very chearfully of muddy tlink-
ing water, and eat wild fruits and roots. For An-

thony

A.R.7-. thony * became superior to himself in adversity; and

Ant. . when he was mortified with disgrace, he resembled in

all respects a man of virtue, which is no mean en-
comium. In hort, as Plutarch observes, it is com-
mon for those who are ill-used by fortune, to acknow-
ledge their faults, and pay refpec to virtue. But all
have not resolution to pracife what they approve,
and to shun what they condemn. On the contrary,
your weak and effeminate characers, when they are
cruihed by adversity, only return more easily to their
former habits afterwards. Upon other occasions, An-
thony returned to his natural inclinations; and when
in his march he met with plenty, he gave himself up
to his usual intemperance. This gave occasion to a
witty faying of one of his friends, who being asked
.,_crb. what Anthony was doing: " He does, answered his

friend, like the dogs along the Nile, he flies and
drinks." For, according to an antient tradition, the
dogs, on the banks of that river, for fear of the cro-
codiles drink as they run. But whenever the want
of provisions came, Anthony suffered it with an he-
roick resolution. This made his troops, which other-
vise, very probably, would have abandoned him,
adhere firmly to him, and put him in a condition
to reap the advantage of the favour which Lepidus
privately intended.

That vain and deceitful man pushed his difflmula-
tons, or perhaps his want of resolution, as far a,
Cic. ad possible. He wrote toRome, promising an inviolabk
Fan. x. attachment to the Senate, and lent letters and couriers
+-' to Plancus to haften his arrival, while he in the mean

time gave orders to Culeo, one of his lieutenants, tc
guard the pafies of the Alps; but instead of defend
ing them, he opened them all. Thus Anthon)
marched down without any molestation, and encamp.
* itin »!» Cr: x S,+r!Tla *is ts ^I's ,tr7 e -I.uts, i duuw Si sys71 e
7 .r
;- t- .-
'i c.: r Jjr!*ri
Sn X'
s s Ts n
oD i? ak 1
Flu :
>.£ -i ; L sV , .aw :i; a tPCi s w 6sna t Si u'
:r L.- ry
: . P- T.

8 ec

ed near Frejus, with a considerable army, Ventidius A. R. 7o,.
having joined him with three legions. At.
Anthony finding himself near Lepidus, did not for- Plut. Ant.
tify his camp with any lines or intrenchments, chu- Appian.
sing to have it known'that he believed himself among
his friends. And he was not deceived; for the whole
army of Lepidus, composed chiefly of old troops,
that had served under Cxefar, was inclined towards
Anthony; and though Lepidus continued to ac the
farce, and refused to fee a General declared a publick
enemy by the Senate; yet Anthony had frequent in-
terviews with the soldiers, advancing as far as the
borders of their lines, with an air ofafflition, in a
mourning habit, and ating the supplicant, conjuring
them to undertake his defence against his enemies.
The end of-all this contrivance was, that one morn-
ing the troops of Lepidus, having destroyed the for-
tincarions on one fide of the camp, and thrown the
earth of the parapet into the ditch, received Anthony,
conducting him to the General's tent, who was then
in bed. They all pretended that they desired to en-
gage in the caue of their friends who served under
Anthony, and were involved in the fame condemna-
tion with them. Lepidus, feeing things carried so
iar, thought he had a sufficient excuse for taking a
tep which he feenmed absolutely forced to, and con-
Inted to afifi Anthony with all his forces. To this Cic. ad
purpose he wrote to the Senate, and observed in his Fam. x.
leter what we have just mentioned, that a sedition of 3'
his soldiers had obliged him to undertake the defence
f ibo great a number of unfortunate Citizens. The cic. ad
Seaate did not susser itself to be deceived by this fri- Brut i.
volous excuie; on the contrary, declared him an ene-
oy to the Publick, and pulled down the statue they
'd decreed to him, which had been erected but a
ew months before. Cicero, Plancus, and Decimus cic. ad
ruts, had judged the fame of the conduct of Lepi- Fam. x. &
us, and thought that his joining with Anthony was Biru&ad
ing to treachery, and not at all to weakness and
midity. In effe, Anthony did not treat him like
VO.. IX. H h a Ge-

A. R 709. a General deprived of his power, to whom he granted
Ant'. c the title and honours of command. We shall fee them

43.
Cic. ad ac afterwards like friends and equals, sharing toge-
Fam. x. ther the fruit of the crimes they are going to commit.
;3' This JunAion was made the z2th of May.
vxC . Juventius Laterenfis, who alone in this whole affair
63. aced with sincerity, alhamed of having been made the

dupe of Lepidus, and despairing of the Repub-
lick, killed himself as soon as Anthony entered the
camp. Plancus speedily repassed the Ifer, and re-
ceived Decimus, who arrived loon after in Gaul with
his army. Thus supported, he continued firm for
about two months, with the party he had embraced;
and, if we believe Cicero's letters, his zeal went so
far as to press Octavius to come and finish the ruin of
the enemies of the Republick, by joining with him.
self and Decimus. He was quite ready to a, pro-
vided he had nothing to risk. But Octavius, at that
time, thought of nothing less than of making war
against Anthony. All his views tended to take ad-
vantage of the consternation, or the renewal of the
troubles and dangers of the Senate, to force them to
content to his being named Consul, in order to re-
lfic him from his engagement.
A-ti?:. He could not have wished for a more favourable
lo.0 opportunity. The consternation of the Senate was

proportioned to the greatnels of the danger, and there
was no resource at hand. They wrote to Brutus and
Caflius to prels them to come to the assistance of their
country; but they were at too great a distance,
Sextus Pompeius had but a handful of men, ant
those troops which they might expe& from Africn
and Sardinia, were not ufficient to support their
spirits. There was then a necessity for having re
course to Octavius, whom they had but just befon
c:tplild and affronted. The Senate, who fine th,
raillne of the liege of Modena had never employe
him, anri even attempted to take his legions from him
ordered him to make war in conjuncion with Decimu
againlt Anthony and Lepidus.

OtaviL!i

O&avius, far from being disposed to declare him-A.R. 709.
self an enemy to there two Generals, atually nego- Ant. C.
tiated with them. Wherefore he not only refused as 43
a favour the commission which was given him, but he
drew from it a pretence to irritate the soldiers against
the Senate. He made them understand that the
Senate, always devoted to the memory and cause of
Pompey, had no other design than to make those
who were attached to Cetfar destroy each other; and
that the fruit of so many wars, in which they were
fuccefively engaged, would be the triumph of Pom-
pey's party, which had so often been vanquished.
That besides, it was very strange, that they should
fend them out upon a new expedition, without paying
them the rewards promised for the first, which they
had so happily terminated. He added, in order to
affe& them by the most powerful motive, that the
veteran soldiers could no longer depend on the peace-
able and certain poffffion of those estates which Cafar
had granted them. That this poffeflion was founded
on Cfar's as, againit the validity of which the
Senate had just manifefled its displeasure, by order-
ing an enquiry to be made into all that Anthony had
done during his consulship, which was authorized by
the fame ats. In fine, he mixed some reflections on
the danger he was in himself, which he protested gave
him less concern, than their proper interest. The
only remedy, in his opinion, for so many disappoint-
ments was, to make him be declared Consul; and he
promise, that if he arrived at that office, he would
take the molt effectual measures in order that the
soldiers might enjoy the just recompences of their
services, and to revenge the death of his father.
This speech was received with very great applause,
and in consequence of it the soldiers engaged them-
selves, by oath to one another, not to fight against
any of those who had served under Cafar. This was
plainly refusing to make war against Lepidus and
Anthony, whose armies were chiefly corpoled ofthofl
luclders. They further voted a deputation of four

H h hundred

A.R. 709. hundred of them to the Senate, to demand the pay.
At. C. ment of the five thousand denrii which had been pro-

mifed them, and the promotion of their General to the
Consulship.

It was doubtless about this time that Cicero, who
saw the tendency of all there motions, and who
thought himself always lure of the friendlhip ofO&a.
vius, wrote to him in favour of Brutus and Cafius,
for whom, properly speaking, he demanded a pardon,
which occasioned a very harp reprimand from Bru.
tus to his too humble intercessor, but I defer men-
tioning it here, that I may not interrupt the thread
of my narration.

The Senate con ented to give fatisfa&ion to the
army with regard to the money: but they would not
hear them speak of the Consulship for Oftavius, in-
sifting particularly on his youth. The soldiers, how-
ever, who had been well inftruaed before, quoted
examples to support their demand, viz. that of Va.
lerius Corvus, the first Scipio, and also that of Pom-
pey, which was still recent. They further alledged
the privilege which the Senate had granted O&avius,
of putting up for offices ten years before the age pre-
fcribed by the laws; representing that he wanted only
a ftep to arrive at the point which he then pretended
to. Thus one infraction of rules or statutes becomes
a handle for demanding a second. The Senate, how.
ever, which had several other reasons for refusing Oc.
tavius the Consulship, besides that of his youth, kept
u. . firm to their refusal. Then Cornelius the Centurion,
36. chief of the Deputation, went out from amongst the

Deputies, and laying his hand on his sword, he turn-
ed towards the Senators, and laid to them: * " If
" you will not give the Consulship to my General, I
" will give it him myself." Upon which Cicero an-
fwered pleasantly, " If you demand the Confullhip

I have quoted from Plutarch a similar paTage on the subjea of
Caa. ;second Consulship Perhaps the historians have confound-
e' t t Cefars : and perhaps the fame thing may have happened

in

" in this manner for Otavius, you will certainly ob- A.R.7o9.
" tain it." Ant. C.

This was the intention of the young General, who
feeing the soldiers irritated at the Senate's refusal,
took care to nourish and foment their passion, and
make them press him to usurp by force what the Se-
nate had before refused. Thus yielding to so grate-
ful a violence, he passed the Rubicon, a name fatal iii
the civil wars of the Cafars, and with eight legions
he marched against Rome. At this news the Senate
was quite disconcerted. I have observed elsewhere,
that firmness in a society is not to be expeted when
the danger is very pressing, of which the pusillanimous
conduct of the Senate on this occasion is an evident
proof. The first motion that was made, was to grant
every thing both to the soldiers and the General.
They gave orders to diftributc the five thousand de-
narii a-piece, promised long ago to the troops, and
Ofavius had the whole charge of this commiflion.
To him they likewise promised the Confullhip. But
scarce were the deputies gone to carry him this decree,
when the Senators began to reproach themselves with
their timidity; and two legions being arrived from
Africa at that time, as if by appointment, they took
courage, imagining that with these two legions, and
a third which Panla had left to guard the city, they
hould be able to defend themselves against the ap-
proaching army. They stationed troops upon the
Mons Janicularius, where the publick money was de-
posited; and fortified the bridge which forms a com-
munication between the Janiculum and the City. It
had been greatly to be wished that they could have
secured the mother and the fiter of Ocavius: be-
cause that with such hostages they could have obtained
every thing from that young General. But their
friends concealed them so faithfully, that it wag not
possible to discover their place of refuge.
But all this haughtiness and boldness of the Senators
came to nothing at the arrival of Otavius. He had
taken the wife precaution, to fend proper persons

HI h 3 before

A. R. 709. before to declare that they had nothing to fear from

At. . him, for he would commit no hostility in the city.

By means of this promise the people remained quiet;
and even the Senate's three legions, who were but
coldly attached to the cause, and who probably me-
ditated at that time the change of party which they
Ibon after executed, did not so much as draw a sword;
so that Octavius being encamped at the foot of the
Quirinal, was heartily congratulated. Every body
flocked to him, not only the lower people, but even
a great many of the first rank in the Senate. Next
morning he entered Rome with a sufficient guard, and
was received anidif the acclamations of the people.
His firit care was to go to the temple of Vesta,
where he knew his mother and fifler were. Then the
three legions ranked themselves under his command,
and the Senate, destitute of all resource, submitted to
him; Cornatus the Praetor only killing himself in de-
_pair. The reft went and made their fubmiflions to
him whom fortune had rendered their matter. Even
Cicero hirmfellubmitted to this hard and mortifying
tail, which drew on him a fliarp rebuke from Ofa-
vi.us, as being the last of his friends who came to con-
gratulate him.

It was with extreme reluctance that the Senate sub-
nitted to this young and aspiring man. But what
cannot be excused in so wife a society is, that upon
a rife report, without the least foundation, they lud-
ceC.nv changed their conduct, and foolishly attempted
to lhake off a yoke, which by this means was only
rendered the heavier. Some person, it seems, told
the chiefs of the Senate, that the two legions which I
have frequently mentioned, the Martial and the
fourth, and were excellent troops, had left Odavius,
and declared tzmfelves for the cause of liberty. This
news pread itfeif in an instant; the Senators assembled
in the night; and Cicero being one of the first who
came to the gate of the Senate-houfe, encouraged all
who came in, zealously to defend the Republick.
They dispatched immediately Aquilius Crassus to

Picenum,

Picenum, in order to raise troops. After all this, they A. R. 7o9.
examined the source of the report on which their Antc;
hopes were founded; and as they could not discover
any certain author, they became more terrified than
ever, and presently dispersed themselves. Cicero fled
out of the city in his litter, and O&tavius had reason
to ridicule an attempt so ill-concerted. As to him, he
observed always the fame apparent mildness in his pro-
ceedings; and Aquilius Crassus, who was taken pri-
soner disguised like a slave, being brought before
him, he immediately pardoned him, knowing very
well that he hould have opportunity enough after-
wards to revenge himself.

Thus having become absolute matter of Rome, he
took pofeflion of all the publick money, which was
deposited in the Janiculum and elsewhere, and difcri-
buced to each of the soldiers two thousand five hun-
dred denarii, promising them very soon a like fum
which remained due to them. Next he pushed his
ele&ion to the Consulship: and when he had taken
all his measures like a scrupulous candidate, and one
who was far from wanting to curb by his presence
the liberty of the suffrages, he went out of the city.

This election was extremely irregular, such as there
never had been any instance of before, nor was it
ever imitated afterwards. It is true, that the two
Consuls being dead, it was not easy to proceed ac-
cording to the laws, and antient customs, to the no-
mination of their successors. The inter-reigning Con-
luls could not be nominated till the Curule magit-
trate's office was expired; and consequently to eled
Conluls, by the way of inter-regnum, it was necel-
fary to wait till the first of January. Sylla had got
himself established Ditator, in a cafe similar to the
present: and Caesar had usurped the fame title with-
out the help of the Consuls. But this resource, tho'
unlawful, was yet wanting here, because the name of
Ditator had been abolished for ever by a law of An-
thony. He was advised to create two Pro-conluls by
a decree of the Prator of the city, supported no doubt

H h 4 by

ALg709. by the authority of the Senate, wcfe cffice fihould be

m. C' confined to preside in the assemblies where the Consuls

were to be ele&ed. Thus Otavius was named Con.
ful, together with Q Pedius, one of his coheirs,
which they gave him rather as a servant than a col-
legue. He took pofieflion of the Confullhip the tenth
day of August, when he was not yet full twenty years
old, according to the common way of reckoning, for
he was born the twenty-fecond of September. But as
in order to reform the kalendar, Cfar had made one
year to consist of fifteen months instead of twelve, the
months which were added ought to be reckoned into
the age of Otavius. And thus he was entered, ac-
cording to this computation, into his twenty-firft year
when he was made Consul.

After the ceremony of taking poffefllon was over,
the first ue that he made of his consular power, was to
secure to himself his estate. He put the last eal to
the affair of his adoption, by having it ratified in the
assembly of the Curia, which the opposition and arti-
fice of Anthony had hindered him from obtaining the
year before. By this formality he entered into full
CiTEffion of all the rights of Cafar's son.
He next supported the obligations of this title, in
avenging by the publick authority, which he had now
in his own hands, the death of his father. This I
shall relate in the following book, anJ in the mean
time lay before the reader the refle&ions and com-
plaz.ts o Brutus againli Cicero: one of the molt pre-
cious fragments which antiquity has transmitted to us,
and where we fee with admiration that great fureriority
which virtue gives a person over the belt talents, dig-
nities, and the advantage of age.

Cicero, as I have said, had wrote to young Cfar
in favour of Brutus and Cassius, in the following
terms: " There is one thing, said he, demanded
and.expeted of you, which is, that you consent to
preserve to the Republic, persons who are much
esteemed by a'l good men, and indeed by all the
Romans." Bruus, to sho. this part of Cicero's

letter

letter had been sent by Atticus, cnfequently wrote R. m·
to him, who imagined he had done him a friendly of- 4."
fice. At first he thanks hirr very politely for his
good intentions, but enraged at his going so far, he
repeats to Cicero his own words, and then he adds,
", It is your opinion then*, that if Oftavius does not
consent to our preservation, we must certainly periih.
I would have you know that it is better for us to pe-
rifh, than to be prote&ed by him. I can never be-
lieve that the Gods have taken such an aversion to the
Romans, as that if lhould become necessary to beseech
Ofavius for the safety of the most worthless Citizen,
so far is it from being necessary for the deliverance of
the universe. It gives me pleasure to make use of
haughty expreffons here, and certainly it is proper
to use them to those who do not know what is to be
feared for some people, and demanded from others."

Brutus proves to Cicero, and makes him sensible of
it, how unworthy it was to acknowledge Otavius
for a matter, and to address a supplication of that na-
ture to him. He observes, that if he, and those of
his opinion were desirous to be obliged to any one for
proteetion, Anthony would have given them the molt
advantageous terms. " And t this child, fays he,
whom the name of Cafar, which he bears, seems to
animate against those who have killed the other Cae-
far, how much do you think it would have cost him
* Unum ais efle, quod ab eo potuletur & expectftur: ut eos cives
de quibus viri boni populafque Romanus bene extAimet, salvos velir.
Qid si nolit, non erimus ? Atqui non effe, quarn effe per illum, pra-
/at. Ego, medius fidius, non exiftimo tap omnes deos averfos ee
a alute populi Romani, ut OCavius-ordus fit pro salute cujufquam
civis, non dicam pro liberatoribus Orbis terrarum. Juvat enim mag-
nifice loqui; & certe decet, adversis ignorantes, quid pro quoque ti-
mendum, aut a quoque petendum fit.
t Hie ipfe puer, quem Csefari nomen ;m;tare videtur in Cfaris
interfeaores, quantl aeftimet (si fit commercio locus) polfe nobia auc-
toribus tantum, quantum proseeo poterit, quoniam vivere, & pecu-
nias habere & dice consulares volumus.... Sed mihi prius omnia dii
deeque eripuerint, quam illud judicium, quo non modo heredi ejus
quen occidi non concefferim quod in illo non tuli, fed ne patri qui-
dem meo, si revivifcat, ut patiente me plus legibus ac Senatu poflit.

to

A.R. 709. to have purchased our consent to that power which he
At. C. aspires to, provided we were in the humour to liften

to such a proposal; and which he would certainly
have obtained, because we want to preserve our lives,
to be rich, and maintain our ranks as Consuls ? But
may the Gods deprive me of every thing in the world,
sooner than the constant resolution I have taken, not
only to refute the heir of him I have killed, that
which I would not agree to in himself, but also not
to consent that even my father, were he to return to
life, should be more powerful than the laws and the
Senate."

What he further adds, is in the manner of the
Stoicks, but the subtilty of it does not at all dimi-
nih the elevation of the sentiments contained in it.
*' There * is a contradi&ion, fays he to Cicero, in
what you demand; and it is impofible it should be
granted. You ask OEavius to consent to our prefer-
vation. Do you imagine, that after we have received
security for our lives, by that alone we hall enjoy a
real safety ? What kind of safety can that be called
which mufft cos us both our honour and liberty ? Do
you believe that to live in Rome, is to enjoy safety ?
It is the thing, and not the place, that ought to
procure one that inestimable bleffng. I was robbed
of it while Cafar lived, till the day I formed the pro-
ject of that great and memorable action; and I can-
not be banifned in whatever place I am, as long as I
look upon slavery and the disgrace annexed to it, as
the greatest of evils."

A little afterwards he mentions ome things relat-
ing particularly to Cicero, and gives him very strong

Qui port, od quod petis, fieri poteft, ut impetres ? Rogas enim,
Tciit nos la.oes tile. Viieniur ergo tibi falutem acceptlri, quum vi-
;anr acceperiiiiis ? quam, si prius diiittimus dignitatem ac liberta-
tern, qui po:unums accipere ? An tu Romie habitare, id putas inco-
lurnem cr .: Res, non locu, cportet praftet ituc mihi. Neque in-
colLmr.s ui Caifare vivo, nifi pofiquam illid conlcivi facinus: neqle
usqua:n exifll ee poliurn, dun irvire & pati contumelias pejus odero
IF.-iL cCiinibu3 alis.l

leflons

lessons in a very free manner. " Do not recom- A-R. 79
mend me any more, fays he, to the protetion of your 4t3
young Cefar. If you would take my advice, you
ihould not recommend yourself to him. You must
surely put a very great value on the number of years
which you can now hope to live, since that can make
you stoop to supplicate a child. Beside, 1 would
have you beware of tarnishing the glory of those great
things you have done, and still continue to do against
Anthony. Take care that people do not impute them
to generosity, but to a concern for your own safety;
for if you are willing to ask pardon for us of Ota-
vius, people will think that your scheme has not been
to avoid having a master, but to find out one who
loved you, and was good natured."

After some other reflections, which I omit, he pro-
ceeds thus. " For t my part, I am a man, who not
only disdain to make any supplication myself, but dif-
courage all those who advise me to it; in which if I
do not succeed, at leait I shall not be mortified with
the view of voluntary slavery. Every place where I
can be free, hall be to me a Rome; and I hall
commiserate you and those other Senators, whom nei-
ther age, past honours, nor the examples of virtue in
others could teach to despise life."

He further declares a steady resolution to try every
thing to deliver his country from slavery; and adds,
" If t I meet with the success which is due to so no-

Me vero pofthac ne commendaveris Cefari tuo: ne te quidem
ip':um, si me audies. Valde care aeftimas tot annos, quot ifta etas
recipit, si propter earn caufam puero ifti fupplicaturus es. Deinde,
quod pulcherrime fecifti ac facis in Antonio, vide ne convertatur a
hude maximi ..nimi ad opinionem formidinis. Nam si Oavius tibi
placet, quo de noftra salute petendum fit, non dominum fuogife,
fed amiciorem dominum quafiffe videberis.
t Ego verb is fum, qui non mod6 non fupplicem, fed ctiam coer-
ceam postulantes ut fibi fupplicetur. Aut longe a fervientibus abere,
mihique ee judicabo Romam, ubicunque liberum ehfe licebit: ac
veltei miferebor, quibus nec aetas, neque honores, neque virtus aliena
dulcedinem vivendi minuere potuerit.
t Si fecuta fuerit qua debet fortuna, gaudebimus omnes: fin minus,
ego tamen gaudcbo. Qibus enim potlus hac vita facis ant cogita-
tionibus traducatur, quam iis qua pertinuerint ad liberandos cives
mcos ?

ble

A. R. ble a projet, the joy will be universal; if not, at
A ct. leaRf I lhall rejoice myself. For in what aions or
43- schemes can I better employ my life, than in those

which tend to establish my fellow-citizens in posses-
sion of their liberties ?"

When he comes to conclude, he is more gentle,
but nevertheless fRill preserves the ascendant. "I
t beseech and advise you, my dear Cicero, not to
despond or be discouraged; and while you are care-
ful to avert the present evils, endeavour to prevent
those still greater which threaten you. Be persuaded,
that the zeal for liberty, and the generous courage by
which you have saved the Republick both formerly
from the rage of Cataline, and lately from that of
Anthony; be persuaded, I fay, that that courage will
lose its reward, unless supported by a conflarit per-
severance. For certainly that virtue which has been
put to the trial, is fubje& to a more severe law,
than that which has not yet discovered itself. Who-
ever has begun to do good actions, ought to expect
that a continuation of the fame conduct will be de-
manded of him as a debt; and if he is deficient in it,
we are induced to censure him rigorously, as having
deceived us. Thus for Cicero to resist Anthony, is
doubtless worthy of very great praise; but nobody is
furprized at it, because so great a Consul as he has
shewed himfeif, must be expeaed to give a good ac-
count of his Consulship. On the contrary, if the
fame Cicero should be remiss with regard to others,

t Te, Cicero, rogo atque hortor ne defatigare, nen diffidas: fem-
per in prefentibus malis prohibendis futura quoque nifi ante fit oc-
curfum, explores ne e infinuent. Fortem & liberum aninmum quo &
Consul, & nunc Confularis rempublicam vindicafti, fine onftantia &
equabilitate nullum effe putaris. Fateor enim duriorem efle condi-
tionemr fpefatz virtutis, quam incognitz. Benefacta pro debitis exi-
gimus. Q aliter eveniunt, ut decepti ab his, infefto animo repre-
hendimus. Itaque refiftere Antonio Ciceronem, etfi magna laude
dignum eft. tamen, quia ille Consul hunrc Crnfularem merito preftare
videtur. ncro admiratur. Idem Cicero si flexerit adversus alios judi-
cium fuum. qued tanti firmitate ac magnitudine direxit in extur-
bardo Antoi,io, non mod& reliqui tempolis gloriam eripuerit fibi, fed
et: m r ter ita evanefcere coget. Nilil enim per fe amplum eft, nifi
ia quo j-d::i ratio exftat. BRUT. ad Cic. 16.

I after

after having shewed his firmness against Anthony, he A. R.7s-
will not only deprive, himself of the glory which he At .
might justly expet, but also lore that which he had
before acquired. For there is nothing truly glorious,
but that which proceeds from a mind that is firm, and
acting out of principle."

It must be owned, that Brutus appears very much
superior to Cicero in this letter. But that virtue,
which is purely human, is always contradicory to it-
self in some refpet. Thus there is a pride which
discovers itself visibly in a great many of the senti-
ments of Brutus; and this hero's Stoicifr promised
him a firmness which his bad success deprived him of,
as we ihall fee at his death. It is revelation alone, as
I have had occasion to remark, that furnishes us with
a solid support for virtue,, by shewing us the reward
of another life.

At the end of Brutus's letter to Cicero, there fol-
lows another from him to Atticus, which is no less
interesting. The principal subject of this also is Ci-
cero, against whom Brutus expresses himself with less
reserve, though without the least pafion. There had
never been a thorough intimacy between them, as any
one may easily observe, who reads with attention
Cicero's letter to Atticus. The fame interest and
manner of thinking, with regard to government, had
made them contract a sincere friendship, but always
accompanied with some feeds of disunion. The dif-
ference of their characters was an obstacle to the
uniting of their hearts. The one was more gentle,
pliable, and disposed to make allowances for cir-
cumftances of times and perlbns; the other was more
haughty and rigid, taking truth and justice for the
only rule of his sentiments and conduc, so that it
was no easy matter for two persons in such different
characters to agree perfectly in every circumstance.

The fubje& of this letter from Brutus to Atticus,
is, that Cicero, who loved praise, had complained,
that Brutus never paid him any compliment upon the
real services which he had rendered to the Republick.

Brutus

A. K 79. Brutus answered, that Cicero had performed wonders
A: .. against Anthony, but that he poiled all by his com-

plailance for young O&avius. This answer is wrote
with great copiousness, energy, and nobleness of fen-
timent. I shall give an extrat of ome of the most
beautiful parts of it.

Brutus * accuses Cicero of having pushed the de-
fire he had of pleasing Ocavius so far as to insult
Cafca, one of those who had killed Cefar, and to
treat him as an Assassin. If the fact was true, it was
certainly very strange. Brutus looks upon it as cer.
tain, and expresses very strongly his indignation against
it. " Cicero is not sensible, then, fays he, that
these injurious terms which he makes use of fall
more juitly on himself, since he has occahioned the
death of five illustrious citizens instead of one. He
miil own himself to be an Assassin before he can
brand Cafca with that name; and, with regard to our
associate, he imitates the invetives of Cataline's fa-
vourers. What ! because we are not constantly praif-
ing our ides T. of March, as he has always in his
mouth the + nones of December, does he think that
he has a better right to decry an heroic action, than
Beftia § and Clodius had to criticise his confulflip ?"

Brutus proceeds direfclv to the principal objet of
his letter. " Our i frienc Cicero, fays he, glories in
* Nefcio cifid fcribam tibi, nif unum: pueri & cupiditatem & li-
centiam pot;i:s effe irnit:.tam quam repreffam a Cicerone: tantumque
eum tribuere huic indulgentiae, ut fe nalediais non abftineat, iis
cuidein qua in ipfuin dupliciter recidunt, quid & plures occidit uno,
seque prius opcrtet fateatur ficarium, qulm objiciat Cafc quod ob-
jicrt, & imitatur in Cafca Beftiam. An quia non omnibus horis jac-
tamus Idu. Martia, filiiiter atque ilie Nonas Decembres fias in ore
habet, eo melihre cornitione pulcherrinmum fa&utm vituperabit, quin
Beftia & Clcdius reprte!c::dere iiu;s Confulatum foliti lint ?

- The dav on hich Cafar was killed.
I The day on wh:ch the accomplices of Cataline were condemned
to death by the Senate.
§ Tribunes of the people, who railed at Cicero's Confullhip.

o Suftinuile mihi gloriatur bellurn Antonii togatus Cicero noter.
Quid hoc mihi prodet, si merces Antonii oppreffi pofcitur in Antonii
locum fuccefflo; & ii vindex illius mali, autor exftitit alterius, fun-
dairr.ntum & radices habituri altiores, si patiamur ut jam ifta qua
facit, non dominationen, non, lcd dorninum Antonium timentis Gint.

hav-

having supported the war against Anthony, without A.R. 709.
going out of Rome. And of what use can this great An". c
piece of service be to me, if by way of recompence
for having oppressed Anthony, I am demanded to
restore him to his former dignity; and if the avenger
of the first tyrant must be allowed to set up another,
who, if we susser it, will be more strongly etablilhed,
and more hardly extirpated ? No, Cicero in ating
thus, does not shew his fear of tyranny, but only
that he will not have Anthony for the tyrant. But I
can never approve of his way of thinking, who has an
aversion only for the person and not for the thing, be-
ing no ways afraid of favery in itself, but of slavery
under an exasperated mailer."

What follows a little below is frill more bitterly
expressed. " We * are but too afraid of death, fays
he, of exile and poverty. These, according to Ci-
cero, are the worst of evils; and, provided he has to
do with men, of whom he can obtain his desires, and
be praised and caressed, he does not refuse a slavery
which is honourable, if there can any thing be said to
be honourable in the midst of misery and disgrace.
Although O&avius calls Cicero his father, consults
him in every thing, praises him, and returns him ac-
knowledgments, yet these fine compliments will soon
be belied by their effects. For who is there so void
* Ninmium timemus msrtem, & exfilium, & paipertatem. Hxc
videntur Ciceroni ultima else in malis: & dum habeat i quibus impe-
tret que velit, & a quibus colatur ac laudetur, ferviutem, honorifi-
c3;n modo, non afpernatur: si quidquam in extrenm ac miferrima
contumielia potelt honorificum effe. Licet ergo patrem appellet O&a-
vius Ciceronerm, referat omnia, l.udet, gratias agat ; tanien illud ap-
parebit, verba rebus effe contraria. Qid enim tam alienum ab hu-
inanis fenfibus eft, quim eum ratris habere loco, qui ne liberi quidein
hofniiis numero fit ? Atqui eo tendit, id agit, ad euin exitum prope-
rat vir optimus, ut fit illi Octavius propitius. Ego j nu iis artibus ni-
hil tribuo, quibus fio Ciceronen inftrutiffinum ef'e. Qoid enim
illi proflint que pro libertate patrie, qua; de dignitate, qux de morte,
exfilio, paupettate, kiripfit cupiofiflime Q.anto autem inagis illa cal-
lere videtur Philippus, qui privigno minus tribuerit, quam Cicero
aheno tribuat ? Deinat igitur gloriando etiam infe&ati dolores noftros.
Quid enim noftri, vi&tum efle Antoniurn, si vitus clt ut alii vacaret
Liuod ille obtinuit? tainetfi tuz littcrae dubi ia m nunc significant.

of
2

A-R. 79.of common sense as to look upon one as fater,
Ant. C- who is not even a freeman ? In the mean time our
4i' friend is in the right to regard the friendlhip and fa-

vour of Otavius as the obje& of his wishes, and ulti.
mate aim of his politicks. I have no more any re.
gard for all thole fine accomplilhments with which
Cicero is adorned. Of what service is it to him, all
chat he has wrote with so much eloquence for the li.
berty of his country, upon the glory of virtue, death,
exile and poverty? How much more must Philip,
though not a man ot learning, appear to possess those
great maxims ? He does less for his fon-in-law,
than Cicero for a ranger. Let him cease then
to increase our troubles, by praising himself at such a
rate. Of what service is it to us that Anthony has
been vanquiffed, if that was done only to fill his place
with another ? Besides, your letter makes me appre-
hend that the victory is not entire, nor quite con-
firmed.

* I agree ', then, that Cicero shall live, since he
is resolved upon it, suppliant and dependant, if he is
not aamed to dishonour his age, his former high
offices, and glory. As for me, I will make war for
ever, I do not fay again !l perlins, but the thing itself,
against tyranny, againir those commands issued in an
extraordinary manner, against that domination and
power which would raise itlelf above the laws: and
there is no slavery so agreeable and advantageous, the
offer of which can seduce me, or make me abandon
my resolution. In vain you tell me that Anthony is
an honest man. I never believed it. Our ancestors
never would allow that in the Republick, a father
should be suffered to be a master and a tyrant."

Vivat hercule Cicero, qui poteft, supplex & obnoxius, si neque
ata:is, neque honorurn, ncque rerum geftarum pudet. Ego certe
ouin cum ipfa re bellum germin, hoc eft, cum regno, & imperiis ex-
tnordinariis, & dominatione, & potentia qu3 supra leges fe efe velit,
nulia erit tam bona conditio .erviendi qua deterrar: uamvis fit vir
onuru, it fcribis, Antoniuv quod ego nunquam exiftiumvi Sed
cominum, ne parenteir quidem rmajoies no~t voluerunt efe.

Bru-

Brutus, after this long invective, which he very A.R. 7o
well knew would grieve Atticus, makes some excuse At. C.
for it; but, however, without retracting. On the
contrary, he insists afrelh upon the very foundation
of the thing. " Be * periuaded, fays he, that my
affeEtion for Cicero is not in the least diminifthd,
but my esteem very much: for it is impolfible that
we fiould not judge of objects according to their ap-
pearances."

It rmuIt be confefifd, that these two letters of Bru-
tus have a haughtiness and roughnes .which few
people are capable of. But had it been poflible to
have preserved the liberty of Rome, it could only
have been done by a man of that charater. The
conduct of Cicero, especially towards the latter times,
could not bear a comparison with that of Brutus. It
was too gentle, timorous, and ineffectual; and I am
furprized, how people can undertake to juffify his
complaisance fr Otavius, when they fee how he
was rewarded for it. What could happen worse to
him than a cruel death ? And how much more glo-
rious would this death have been, had he shewn the
fame vigorous spirit against Octavius, as that with
which he subdued the tyrannical power of Anthony ?

In concluding this book, I ought not to omit the
oigin of oe of the principal towns of France; viz.
Lyons, wich was founded by Minutius Plancus,
who, while he wavered, waiting to declare himse:f
for th:lt party which appeared the ftrongeit, established
a colony at the confluence of the Saone and the
Rhone. The inhabitants of this twn came from
Vienne, formerly the capital of the Ailobrogi, and
ancerwards a Roman colony. During the dif.nfion?
and w-ars between the Roman genera!s, the natives of
that country had laid hold of the opportunity to drive
out from their antient capital, tihe new comeers who
cr:'.-tficd them. Thelc retired to the place where
' iTrfunde tibi (c vchn!;tate p:opria mea niali remisum efe, de
i!';C;.i .ir£;tcr. :2qu enim imperrr2i poteft. q;n q-ua'lc ::i:dl:
...;ul ei, talem quilque de illo opinion.m haicat. ilt r. .tlice.
VOL. IX. I i Plan-

A.R. 707. Plancus, by order of the Senate, built the town of

A. Lyons. Vienne loon after returned under the Roman

power; but looked with a jealous eye on the rapid
increase of the new colony, which, by the advantage
of its situation, oon became very flourishing; and
hence arose a rivalfnip between those two towns, which
has lasted for several ages.

THE

[ 483 ]
THE
ROMAN HISTORY.

BOOK THE FORTY-NINTH.
T HE second Triumvirate. A profcrip-

tion. The ruin of the Republican
party at Philippi. The death of Caf-
fius and Brutus. An. Rom. 709, 710.

SECT. I.
Oatavius legally condemns all those who had killed Cifar.

Sextus Pompeius aud Cn. Domitius, who had no part
in the atlion, are comprehended in the condemnation.
OSavius puts to death , Gallius Pretor of the City.
He makes the Senate revoke the decree againfi Anthony
and Lepidus. The misfortune and death of Decimus.
Ocavius, Anthony, and Lepidus, unite together. Their
interview in an island of the Reno. They wrangle
about those whom they ought to prescribe. The exchange
of Cicero's bead, againif tbofe of the uncle of Anthony
and the brother of Lepidus. The projes of a trium-
virate. The marriage of OAavius with Anthony's
daughter-in-law is resolved upon. Prelude to the massa-
cres. Great terror in Rome. The death of the Consul
Pedius. The entry of te three generals into Rome. A
law to ef/ablijh the Triumvirate. The editl of the pro-

I i a2 ription.

fcrr:p::;n. -be prficripti(n of the Triumviri more nu.
,enrcas than that of S lla. A great many are proscribed
on account cf their riches. Affeieation in the choice of
the names placed at the head of the catalogue of the
pr fcrrption. Ota-Jius as cruel as his Collegues, or ra-
tler noe so. The death of Cicero. Inveaives of
-',riters of allforts againji Anthony, upon the fujet of
Cic:ro's death. The reason why Oavius has been
spared. Chara5er of Cicero. An expreflion of Brutus
concerning his deatb. C. Antonius killed by way of re-
prifal. The death of uintus Cicero ad hisfon. L.
C<far saved by his fiftir, Anthony's mother. Lepidus
cot/ents to the escape of his brother Paulus. The death
ct Pollio's father-in-law, of the brother of Plancus,
aind of Toranius tutor to OElavius. erres is proscribed.
A;; example of the piety cf Eneas renewed by the son of
Oppius. Varro put into cuflody by Calrnus. Atticus
-ratckd ortt cf the lI.j cf the proscribcd. An elo-
gi.i;, cf bis prudence and humanity. Meffla blotted
cut ss the number f the projfribed. Particular obfcr-
zatloCs upon fc;ime of the roicribed. Fulvia makes a
figre in the prof cri;ticiz. The pubt'ick hatred fai.s
parti:u!arly r:pcn Anthony. The odious trlumphs of Le-
i''!s Cr.' Plar.cus. Pefvges opened to the profcri'ed
cut cf Ital, eecia'ly wi:h Sextis Pompeius. Exac-
t:c;:s of the Tri'imira e. A1 tax imposed by them c,;
t.e ladies. Hfrteefa's ,fpech upon this subjet. Ven-
tidiu is wad' Cc;;-:l. His firpri;ing fortune. Civic
cr'w.;ins decreed to the F iar;i-;;ii. The Tritumviri fxear
to cferye the cs of Ceffar, and make others also do
tlb -!ine. T'l-ey appoint nmigifrates ficrfevral years.
Ai. -- OCT AVIUS having obtained the Confulfhipby

.l V th. mneans alrcady mentioned, and thus united

to the far e of hi rms the title of publick authority,
[-':-in to exec-:e the deritn he had always had at
heArt, t'ovpech he had o-::ca'id it a great while, and
und ertook to aveneP th' death of C far. He tcok th
acdvantae c- the Co.I...l - a.hori:y to a., leallv in
this a.'r, He caused the people to absolve Dolabella,

7vhor
7

whom the Senate had declared an enemy to the public, A. R. 709.
on account of the murder of Trebonius; and immedi- Ant. C.
ately eftablilhed by virtue of a law, which was pro- 3
poled by his Collegue Pedius, and supported by the
votes of the people, a court of justice, or extraordi-
nary commiflion, to enquire into the afaflination of
Cefar; and proceed to the tryal and condemnation of
the affaflins and their accomplices.

They were summoned in form, and an officer called
them by their names, to appear at the foot of the
Tribunal, but they were all absent; for those among
them who were at Rome when Otavius approached,
had taken care to avoid the iform by a speedy flight.
Thus not one of them answered to the summons. It
is reported that at the name of Brutus proclaimed by Plut.Brut.
the officer, the whole multitude which filled the place
burst into tears ; and that the more eminent citizens
held down their heads with fiame and confusion. The
affair, however, was pushed with no less vigour upon
that account. There were great rewards promised to
the accusers. L. Corneficius accused Brutus; and
Agrippa, who was always attached to Odavius, took
upon him that odious office against Caflius. It very
well agrees with the low flattering character of the
historian Velleius, to boast as he has done, that Ca-
pito his uncle seconded Agrippa in this affair. They
were all banished under the greatest penalty which
the Raman laws could impol : that is to fay, exile
and conhfcation of their goods. Only one of the
judges had the courage to aboblve Brutus without be-
ing afraid of the prelence of the young Consul, who
affied personally in court, to observe how every one
voted. This judge so intrepid was called Cicilius
Coronas, and was a Senator. O&avius persisting al-
ways in the fame affecation of clemency, did not f:rm
to take amiss the boldncls of Cicilius; but loon after
he banished him.
.AnongfI the accused was Cafca, a Tribune of the
PFCple. As his ofice rendered his perlbn sacred, and
ti' him beyond the reach of the law, (taavius caused

I i 3 him

A. R 709. him to be deprived of it by the votes of the Tribunes,

AntC. upon a proposal of Titius, one of Cafca's Collegues,

who was willing to aflift in vilifying an office with
which he himself was invested.

It was not without design, that in the law of Pedius,
to the murderers of Cfar they added their accom-
plices. This undetermined addition gave Oavius
the power, easily to include in the lame condemnation
with the real authors of the death of his great uncle,
those who had no other crime than that of being sus-
peEted or formidable to him. There were several of
them, no doubt; but in what remains of the history of
those times I find only two mentioned.

The first is Sextus Pompeius, who, so far from
having had any part in the conspiracy, had probably
never heard of it before it was executed, being then
in the farthest corner of Spain. But he was the last
branch of an enemy's family, which O&avius desired
to sacrifice to his safety. I reckon as the second Cn.
Domitius Ahenobarbus, the son of that L. Domitius,
who having always shown an irreconcileable hatred to
Appian. Cfar, was killed when he fled from Pharfalia. An-
civil L.
vp-l L^. thony, in Appian, positively assures us, that Cn. Do-
snet. Ner. mitius had no hand in the murder of the Di&ator;
C. 3' and the testimony of Suetonius is to the fame purpose.
Cic. Pi. What nevertheless renders the thing doubtful is, that
x. N. -. Cicero in his second Philippic ranks him amongt the

conspirators. Perhaps he might be of the number of
those who had the vanity immediately after the death
of Chlar to join with Brutus and Cassius in the Capi-
tol, and wanted to partake of the glory of an action,
in which they had run no riflk. In this cafe it is nnt
furprizing that Cicero, speaking in praise of the con-
fpiracy, thought it his Cditv to give a share of the ho-
nour to Domitius who longed for it; and, on the
other hand, after the ccrfpiracy was become punish-
able in the highe f degree, it is still more easy to con-
ceive that )omitius fnould carefully purge himfelfof
it, and proclaim to all the world, which was very
true, that he had no laand in it. It is certain, how-

x ever:

ever, that he obtained belief, and, by the consent of A. R 709
Ofavius arrived at the Consulship, nay his son mar- 3A . C
ried into the family 'of the Caesars, and became the
uncle of Nero.

Though Otavius at that time seemed wholly en-
gaged in avenging the death of his adoptive father,
and in other refpets he put on a good-natured ap-
pearance, he nevertheless discovered his cruelty with
regard to Q. Gallius, at that time Pretor; and whao"
since the death of Cornutus had thejurifdiEtion of the Suet.Aug.
city. Suetonius relates the fa& with very aggravating 27.
circumstances. He fays that Gallius being come to
salute the Consul, and carrying a pocket-book under
his robe, was suspected of concealing a poignard
there; and upon that alone Octavius, without exa-
mining into the affair, for fear of finding Gallius in-
nocent, made them hurry him away, gave him the
question like a slave, and, in fine, ordered them to
put him to death, after having pulled out his eyes
with his own hands. I own I can hardly believe, that
Otavius could be guilty of so brutal a barbarity. He
relates himself, in the memoirs which he composed
of his life, that Gallius, having demanded a confe-
rence of him, endeavoured to assassinate him ; that in
consequence of this he was put in prison, from which
being released on condition of leaving Rome, he pe-
rifhed either by hipwreck, or by the hands of robbers
on the high-way. This relation appears to me much
more probable, only it is natural to think that Octa-
vius disguises under the notion of a hipwreck, or the
attack by robbers, his order for assassinating Gallius
as soon as he was out of Rome.

It was no great affair to denounce condemnation
against those who had killed Cefar; but to put the
ientence in execution, they must vanquish twenty Le-
gions which Brutus and Cassius had under their com-
mand. Oavius was not strong enough for such an
enterprize alone. He therefore resolved to put the
last hand to the treaty of reconciliation and alliance,
which had for some time been negotiated between

I i 4 him,

A.R. 7o9 him, Anthony, and Lepidus. He had been charged
Art. c. bythe Senate to make war agaift them; and as he

frill eigned to obey the orders of the Senate, which
he had crused, he departed with his army with a de,
sign, as he said, to fulfil his cormmilion. But in his
ablence Pedius his Colicgue proposed to the Senate,
to revoke the decrees by which Anthony and Lepidus
had been declared enemies to their country. The
tbjec Senators durst not reject the proposal, but they
wanted to oblige Octavius to explain himself, though
he had already lufficiently shewn his intentions, and
they deferred coming to a resolution till they knew his
opinion. He answered, with his usual dissimulation,
that he was not at liberty to determine in this affair
according to his mind; that the soldiers obliged him
to incline towards clemency. Thus the Senate re-
eftabiifhcd Anthony and Lepidus in all their rights and
dignities, and Oftavius wrote to Anthony, that he in-
tended to join hIm against Decimus.

It was no difficult maztcr to destroy this only chief
of the Republican party in the weft. In an instant all
was turned againit him. Pollio, who arrived from
Spain with two Legions, joined Anthony; and Plan-
cus, whr, after the raising of the siege of Modena, had
testified a great deal of zeal for the cause of liberty
and for Decimus, not only abandoned his unfortunate
Collecue, but even undertook to betray him; and
not being able to succeed in it, he deferred to An-
thony with his four Legions.
c:;. ad Decimus had a considerable army, viz. ten Legi-
Fain. X. ons; but the strength of it was not proportioned to

the number of troops, being alnoft all new levied.
Not being able then to support himfelfagainit so many
and ich powerful enemies, he quitted Gaul, pafled
the Alps, and resolved to gain Illyria, in order to
join M. Brutus in Macedonia; but Oftavius guarded
all the passages. Decimus in- so great an extremity
eneavoured to take the route of Germany, and to
make his way to Brutus through those barbarous na-
tions hich in those days occupied that vast country.

But

But the soldiers refusing to follow so desperate a re- A. R. 7C9-
ifpltion, almost all left him, and ranged themselves .
some under the flandard of Anthony, and others un-
der that of Ocavius. There remained only three
hundred Gaulish horse, which formed his guard, and
which presently dispersed themselves different ways,
so that he was obliged to fly himself with only nine
attendants. After having wandered in different parts,
he was at last ftopt in Burgundy by robbers, who at
his earnedf desire conveyed him to the prince, or ruler
of the country, who was called Camelus or Capenus,
and whom Decimus looked upon as a friend. This
Gaul received him gracioufy, and with all the exter-
ral demonfirations of respect; but he privately in-
formed Anthony, who sent an officer named Furius,
accompanied with some horsemen, with orders to
bring him the head of the fugitive.
Had it been possible for the unfortunate Decimus Val. Max
to have escaped, the generosity of a friend would Iv 7
certainly have saved him; for at the approach of
those who were sent to kill him, he hid him;nilf in an
obscure retreat, and Anthony's men having pursued |
him thither, Ser. Terentius, favoured by the obfcu.
rity of the place, presented himself instead of Deci-
mus, and was almost killed for him; but Furius
knew his victim, and prevented the mittake. Deci- ~
mus was then pulled out of his lurking place, trem-
bling; and he hewed in his last moirents a timidity
and love for life, which seemed to disturb his reason.
For he withdrew back his head from the sword, and Va.. Max,
shen they ordered him to itand firm, " Yes * I will, Ix. 3-

Senca
fays he, let me die if I do not." A very extraordi- Epic?. .s'
narv expression in the circumstance he was then in.
Htis head was carried to Anthony, who wanted to exa-
mine it, and then made them bellow the laif honours
upon it. Decimus perifhled the second of those who
had attempted the life of Cfar. Soon afterwards
' Non folmn cervicem gladio filhtraxit, verum etiam ccniilrtius
Miil prAebere admonitus, isis his verbis juravit: " Ira vivam, dbo."

AL. MAX. IX. 13.

Mnu-

A.R79. Minucius Bafilus, another of the conspirators, was
Ant C. murdered by his saves, who could not bear his

cruelty.

All the Roman forces on the eftablilhment in Italy,
Gaul, and Spain, were under the command of O&a-
vius, Anthony and Lepidus; and there no longer re.
mained an enemy in arms in all these countries, only
as far as they were enemies to one another. For each
of them having no other obje& than his own particu-
lar power, regarded the others with ajealous eye, and
the design of supplanting and destroying them reigned
in his breast. But in the east they had common ene-
mies to subdue, the fear of which suspended the es-
set of their diffidence and reciprocal animofities
Before they could turn their arms against each other,
it was necessary to exterminate Brutus and Caffus.
Ptut. Anthony, who had passed the Alps as a fugitive, re-
AntOn. passed them at the head of eventeen Legions, in-

cluding the troops of Lepidus, besides fix Legions
which were left in Gaul under the command of a very
despicable man, Lucius Varius, his bottle companion,
whole strong propensity to drinking had gained him
the name of Cotyla, which signifies a pint. Lepidus
and Anthony, re-united together, advanced with a
formidable army towards Bologna, whither O&avius
also marched with almost an equal number of troops.
The three chiefs were resolved to meet and unite to-
gether, from a motive already mentioned. They had
only the neceflary terms to confider of, and they
treated of them themselves, without mediators and
ministers. The affair was condu&ed in the following
manner.
Aprian. At a small distance from Bologna there runs a
cvil. . little river, in the middle of which there was an island,

which was judged the propereft place for holding the
conferences. It seems that this river was that which
is now called the Reno. They took all imaginary
precautions in order to prevent distrusts, which were
great, and but too well founded. They raised two
bridges, one of which joined the ifand to the righl

bane

bank of the river, and the other to the ift. O&tavius A.R. o9.
and Anthony brought each five Legions within a cer- Ant. C.
tain distance, which had been agreed upon, and
which was equal on both fides. From thence they
advanced as far as the bridges, accompanied only
with three hundred men each, and there they stopped.
Lepidus, who had had no personal quarrel with ei-
ther, entered the ifand alone, and examined it, to
convince himself that there was no ambuscade to fear.
Then he gave the signal to Oftavius and Anthony,
who set out at the fame time to come to him, and at
meeting pushed their precautions so far as to search
each other, for fear of arms being concealed under
their cloaths. There were three feats placed in the
middle of the island, where they all fat down, O&a-
vius being in the middle, as Consul.

The greatest difficulty they met with, during the Piut. c
three days which the conferences lasted, was tle &Ant.
choice of those whom they ought to sacrifice to their
resentment. As Anthony and Oavius had made
war against one another with a great deal of heat and
animosity, a great many of thole who were friends of
the one were consequently enemies of the other; and
each, being willing to satisfy his vengeance, made
obje&ions to the saving of those who had been of ser-
vice to the other. Especially they debated for a long
time, and very warmly, on the subjet of Cicero. Ah-
thony declared, that he could neither conent to a re-
conciliation, or a peace, if they did not give him up a
man who had done him so much mischief; and Le-
pidus was of the fame opinion. Oavius opposed it
the first two days, but the third he consented; and,
by a most unnatural exchange, for the head of Cicero,
Anthony yielded to him that of L. Cafar his uncle,
and Lepidus that of his brother Paulus. * Thus,
fays Plutarch, their passion and rage made them for-
get all sense of humanity; or rather they hewed by

"'OTrac itif tro;r' s S x;t \ fSi s ;a linrSv xvo),iu&, ,ya a
s I ' a r -

gFai, as ci y
Cir 7rfa'x Spier iir oy rfiipir ieriav utra t
a pyrA
igi r PLIUT.

~~C~~~ic.~their

their

A. R 7c9. their example, that there is no brute more fierce than
Mt. C. man, where power and paflion are united. I t jo

not believe, fays the fame author elsewhere, that ever
there was a more atrocious, or more unnatural thing
done than the exchange of which I speak. For
trafficking together murder against murder, they be-
came the butchers as well of those whom they gave
up, as of those who were given up to them; and
the injustice was the greater with respect to their
friends, whom they condemned to death even without
hating them. Further one may believe that Anthony
and Lepidus did no great violence themselves, in
sacrificing the one his uncle, and the other his bro-
ther. They could not but take amiss their conifant
zeal for the government of the Republick, and be-
ing lately declared enemies to the publick by their
Ap;=. fuifrages, they had a right to proscribe them by way

of reprisal.

As to the other points, the three tyrants agreed
well enough. It was concluded that O&tavius should
abdicate the Confullhip, and give it up to Ventidius
for the remaining part of the year. That they should
eftabliih sovereign magistrates for the space of five
years, under the title of Triumviri, reformers of the
Republick, with consular authority. That they
should immediately appoint the annual magistrates
for the five years the Triumvirate was to aft, without
having recourse either to the consent of the Senate or
people. They divided among them, as their patri-
mony, all that part of the empire which they were
already masters of, or flattered themselves to be.
Lepidus was to have Spain, and Narbonne Gaul.
Anthony took that Gaul which was conquered by Cse-
far, and the Cisalpine Gaul. Octavius had Africa,
with Sicily and Sardinia; of which it was more easy
to acquire the title than the real possession. For Cor-
+t ' -O. "--ift:tt~i i]f s f):n ts i xltila c TIH /5'b* yrr9.- cil
si
. t! atp.x-i/-<ryti«l ^ó»c, 0/20aC An 0? bAaCanr aG7rts rsJr S 7
iS sh *(. 4J -
si4. 5.'ti' T' £ SK tea r» U;( s~ws1VZ? S i sri4r7t. PLUT. Ant.

nificius

nificius really possessed Africa, properly so called, in A..709.
the name of the Senate; and we hall very soon fee '
Sextus ompeius take poffeflion of the islands of Si-
cily and Sardinia. But OCtavius was obliged to con-
tent himself with this share, feeing his two associates
had more ancient prteenfions, than the agreement
made with him, to these provinces, which they ap-
propriated to themselves. Italy was not comprehended
in this distribution, as being the centre of the empire,
and the country common to them all, of which they
called themselves the defenders and not the masters.
With regard to the provinces beyond ea, they were
under the obedience of Brutus and Cassius, againit
whom war was resolved. In order to which Anthony
and O&aviuswere to take the command, and pass
the ea, each of them at the head of twenty Legions;
while Lepidus with three Legions was to remain in
Rome, to keep Italy in awe; uniting with the dignity
and power of a Triumvir, that of Consul, in place of
D. Brutus who was killed. In fine they determined
the rewards which they were to give their soldiers,
and which was as tyrannical as the reft of their pro-
ceedings. For they agreed to establish them in colo.
nies, in eighteen towns in Italy, of which both the
houses and lands were to be given them. And there
towns, which were so cruelly treated, were atually
the largest and most beautiful of all Italy; such as
Capua, Reggio, Venofa, Benevento, Rimini, and
* Cremona, which last brought Mantua into the fame
di!igrace, by being unluckily in its neighbourhood.

The three Chiefs obliged themselves by oath to
execute those crimes which they had proje&ed, and
communicated to their armies what had been con-
cluded amongst them. O6tavius, to whom all the
honours were constantly yielded, because he was Con-
fil, read to the troops which were assembled toge-
ther, all the articles of the treaty, excepting that

Mlantua, vt ! miifere nimium vicina Cremona.

VIRG. Eciog. IX. ZS.

whLic

A. R. og. which regarded the heads of the great men they in-
Ant. C tended to cut off. The soldiers celebrated, with

fiouts of joy, the reconciliation of the two Generals,
and those of the different armies saluted each other as
friends. And, further to confirm by a domeftick al-
liance, the peace which yielded them so much plea-
sure, they proposed a marriage between Octavius and.
Clodia, Anthony's daughter-in-law, that is to fay,
the daughter of Fulvia his wife by Clodius, Cicero's
enemy. This young lady was hardly marriageable,
and Oavius had already entered into engagements
with the daughter of Servilius Ifauricus. He con-
sented, however, to the proposal which was made to
Set.Aug. him, trusting to the events to release him from that
óx. contrat, if afterwards he ihould find it not agreeable.

The three combined Generals were so eager to shed
blood, that in order to commence their murders, they
only waited till they hould arrive at Rome. They
lent before them a number of soldiers, who had or-
ders to kill twelve, others fay seventeen, of their prin-
cipal enemies, the chief of whom was Cicero. Four
were furprized, and massacred immediately; the
others concealed themselves, or fled. And as the as-
iaffins spread themselves over the city to search for
them, running along the fireets, and vifting the
houses, the terror and confiernation amongst all the
illustrious Citizens were exceeding great. They nei-
ther knew the number nor names of the unfortunate
viktims destined to the faughter. Thus every one
believed himself to be in danger, and despair urged
many of them to attempt the burning of their own
houses, to set fire to the public edifices, in order not
to die unrevenged. The Consul Pedius, who had re-
mained in Rome, took an infinite deal of pains to ap-
pease the commotion, calm the spirits, and persuade
those who were afraid to wait till the next day; and
as soon as day-light appeared, he caused to be fixed
up the names of those who were condemned to fuffcr.
He assured them by the publick faith that there was
not another person who had any thing to fear. Anc

h(

he a&ed sincerely; for he was not let into the secret of A. R. 709.
his matters. The fatigue which he underwent this Ant.C.
night of terror and dismay was so great, that he funk
under it, and died the day following.

These were only preludes to the calamities which
threatened Rome. Presently the authors of the pub-
lick miseries arrived, and made their entries on three
different days. Otavius the firif, then Lepidus,
and last of all Anthony; each being attended with a
Pratorian Cohort or Guard, and one Legion. Thus
the City was entirely filled with soldiers, which they
took care to distribute in the most important posts.
Then P. Titius, Tribune of the people, proposed
the fatal law which established three sovereign magif-
trates, reformers of the Republick, with the consular
dignity, for five years, viz. M. Antonius, Lepidus,
and O&avius, who took possession of this office the
twenty-feventh of November following, and held it to .e-
the last of December of the sixth year, reckoning from tus, apud
their commencement. Pigh.

One may very well imagine that the votes of the
people were favourable to this law which was pro-
posed. They even made publick rejoicings for i.
as for a happy event; and the Citizens again put oir
the robe of peace, at the approaches of a proscription
more cruel than a war. The Triumviri loft no time
in publishing the edift which has been transmitted to
us by Appian, and I believe the reader will not take it
amiss, if I transcribe here an ac very singular in its
kind, and drawn up by an able hand, who was at a
great deal of pains, though without success, to dif-
guise the blackness of the thing, by the most specious
colours possible to make use of.

After the names and qualities of the Triumviri,
followed the tenor of the decree, in these terms. " If
wicked men, by the mos perfidious condu&, were
not humble and suppliant, when they stand in need
of clemency, and, after they have obtained it, ene-
mies to their benefators, and capable of attempting
their lives; we hould not have sien those persons be-

come

A . 79. come the murderers of Cafar, whom he had saved
AntC. by his mercy, after having vanquifled them, whom

he had alol admitted among the number of his friends
and had loaded with all forts of favours, offices, and
honours; and we ourselves hould not be under the
necessity of aing a severe part against those who
have offended us, and declared us enemies to the
publick. But having learned both by our own ex.
perience, and the treatment which Cafar has received,
that there is a degree of wickedness which no cle-
mency can overcome, we rather chufe to prevent our
enemies, than to wait those evils which they have
prepared for us. Our revenge therefore will neither
appear unjust, cruel, nor excessive to any one who
confiders what we have suffered, and especially what
Crefar suffered. He was Dictator and great Pontiff;
he subjected the most formidable nations to this Em-
pire; and he first of all endeavoured to cross the
mighty ocean, and discover to the Romans lands be-
fore to them unknown. And yet this great man has
been murdered in full Senate, in a sacred place, and
in the view of the Gods themselves. Nay, they even
irried their wanton barbarity so far as to stab him
three and thirty times with their poignards. And
those who committed this crime were men whom he
had vanquished, who owed him their lives, and even
some of them mentioned in his will amongst the num-
ber of his heirs. The reft, inltead of punishing o
horrible a crime, have invested the assassins with com-
mands and governments of provinces, of which they
have known so well to take the advantage, that they
have raised the publick money, and with it have le.
vied troops against us; nay, even demanded it of na-
tions at all times enemies to this Empire. They have
burnt or deftroved to the very foundations, those
towns allied to the Romans which they could not
bring over to their partyv; they have intimidated
others, and are preparing to employ those forces
against us and their country.

" We

' We have already punished some of there crimi- A.. 7,9.
nals, and you hall very hortly fee feyrrai others of Ant
them susser the just punishment they. deserve. All
the Weft has submitted to us, Gaul, Spain and Italy.
One thing only remains for us to do, gan that is at-
tended with difficulty; which is to pass the sea, and
compleat our revenge on such of the murderers as
have invaded tihe Eatern provinces.

"As we are just upon the point of making a war
for you, which obliges us to leave Rome, it would
not be agreeable neither to our interests nor yours, to
leave behind us the enemies which we have here in a
condition to take advantage of our ablence, by ob-
serving the uncertain events of war. It would be
likewise dangerous for us in such pressing circum-
stances to lole time by delay. Wherefore we have
resolved to rid ourselves of them all at once, and to
render to them immediately that mischief which they
intended us, in declaring us and our armies enemies
to our country. Thus these unjuit and violent men
condemned an infinite number of Citizens to perish
with us. But we shall be more moderate. No order,
no company, no society of people hall be the object
of our revenge. The choice we hall make hall nor
even comprehend all those who have been at variance
with us, or who have endeavoured to hurt us. Riches,
splendor, and honours shall be reckoned no crimes
by us; and though it is natural that three hould have
a greater number of enemies than one, yet the pu-
nilhments which we shall inflict, shall not affe so
many persons as were proscribed before us by a tingle
General, who, like us, in a civil dissension had un-
dertaken to reform the Republick, and whom you
have firnamed Happy on account of his success. We
shall only punish the most wicked and the most cul-
pable; in all which we have your interest in view, as
much as our own. For while the Chiefs of the state
are divided and form different parties, you who are
placed in a middle station, must of consequence be
great sufferers. These are our motives and further
VOL. IX. K k we

.. R 709. we are obliged to procure some fatisfaion to our fol-
Ant. diers, who have been ill used, and declared enemies
*4' to their country, by those who had formed a projet

for destroying us all together. We might as soon as
we arrived, have executed those whom we had con-
demned. But out of regard to you we strove rather
to proscribe them, than to furprize them at a time
when they did not expet, in order that it might not
be left in the power of the soldiers to extend the effet
of their revenge in their passion to those who ought
to be exempted from it; but that having a lift quite
plain, both by the number and names of those whom
they have orders to punish, they may abstain from
doing violence to any besides.

" Upon these accounts, and for the good and ad-
vantage of the publick, we forbid all and every one
of you to receive any of those whose names are men-
tioned in the lift subjoined to this order, to prote&
them, or be alfifting to them in their flight. Who-
ever shall give them any aid or assistance, or Ihall
hold any kind of correspondence with them, shall be
immediately added to the number of the proscribed,
without being allowed any manner ofexcufe, or means
of defence. Whoever hall kill any of the proscribed,
upon bringing their heads, shall receive as their fee
a hundred thousand sesterces, and if a slave, forty
thousand, together with his liberty, and the rank of
a Citizen the fame as his master. The fame re-
wards are promised to those who Ihall discover any
of the proscribed, and the names of those who hall
receive those rewards lhall not be registered, so that
he need never be afraid of being known afterwards."

I shall not stop to make a great many reletions on
this bloody at, the horrid cruelty of which appears
at first light, and is extremely shocking, in spite of
the frivolous pretexts with which they endeavoured to
palliate it.

I shall only remark first, that, according to Dio,
what the Triumviri boast of confining themselves toa
less number of proscribed than Sylla, is false. That

hifto-
8

historian assures us positively to the contrary; and A.R. 79.
the thing itself is very probable, because any of the Ant. C.
three was full as bad as the author of the first pro-
scription. This difference produced another effe&
very singular and melancholy. When Sylla shewed
this barbarous example, his friends, at least, had no-
thing to fear. But it was not the fame in the present
cafe. As Anthony and O&tavius had had great quar-
rels with each other, and were even at war against
one another, the friends of the one were the enemies
of the other; so that to have been attached to either,
was a sufficient reason for being proscribed. They
were weak friends, and dangerous enemies, facrific-
ing those who had done them service the more easily,
because both of them intended, whenever it should
be in their power, to attack and destroy each other,
whence each of them endeavoured to remove from
his collegue, whom he looked upon as a rival, the
greatest numbers possible of his creatures and affif-
tants; and they were not afraid of being deprived
themselves of any of their supports, provided they
weakened their antagonist. The fame may be said of
Lepidus, who was neither less ambitious, nor more
icrupulous than the two others, but only had less
parts. We fee by this, that the number of those
proscribed by the Triumviri must have been carried
very high, though we cannot exactly determine it.
Sylla had affected no kind of mystery in his affair; he
even gloried in exposing to the eyes of the world four
thousand seven hundred Citizens, of all ranks and
conditions, which he had caused to be put to death.
But Oftavius, when he became master of the Empire
under the name of Augustus, was ahamed of his past
cruelties. It is very probable that he endeavoured
to destroy the monuments of them; and the writers
have not dared to discover what the prince endea-
voured to conceal. We find the number of Senators lut.
reckoned at one hundred and thirty, according to Anton. &
some, and three hundred, according to others. Ap- Livi 1,t,
pian reckons two thousand knights. As to the num- cxx.

K k z ber

A. R. 709. ber of Citizens of the lower order, we are quite in the
Ant. C. dark.

43 My second remark regards the express declaration

which the Triumviri made in their edict, to proscribe
no body on account of their riches. There couid be
nothing more opposite to their real intentions. They
greatly wanted money, without which they could
not make head against Brutus and Calius, who had
acquired great treasures, especially the last, in the
rich countries of Asia and Syria. Thus it is fill
more true with refpe& to the proscription of the Tri-
umvirate than that of Sylla, that the greatest of all
crimes was to be rich, and by this means afford to
there avaritious tyrants the hopes of an ample spoil.

The names which appeared at the head of the ca-
talogue of proscription, declared at once the whole
fury of the Triumviri, and were signals of terror to
demonfirate, that no body ought to expet that any
consideration could be capable of moving them. The
first who were proscribed were Paulus a brother of
Lepidus, and L. Cefar the uncle of Anthony. Next
followed Plotius the brother of Plancus, and I. Quin-
tius, iather-in-law to Pcllio. Though in the mean
time, in another lift, at the fide of the former, Plan-
cus and Poiio were designed Consuls, the one for the
year following, the other for the fourth year after the
Triumviri were eftabiifhed, And as if O&avius had
been apprehensive of degenerating from there examples
of inhumanity, besides Cicero, whom he was so much
obliged to, he proscribed C. Tcranius, a friend of his
.utt.A-r.> father, who had been his own tutor when he was a

child.

It is then to little purpose that some writers have
attempted to take part of the blame from Otavius,
and to make a diifintion between him and his Col-
legues. Suetonius informs us, that at first he actually
oppoled the proje&t of the proscription; but when
once it was relolved upon, he puhed it with more
vigour than tihe other two; and whereas Anthony and
Lep:dus aliowed themselves to relent on several occa-

sions,

sions, that he was almost always inexorable. After A. R. 7o.
the proscription was executed, Lepidus thought they Ant. C.
ought to make a kind of excuse to the Senate for the
past, and give them room to expect for the future a
conduc full of gentleness and clemency, because he
looked upon his revenge as satisfied; but Octavius,
on the contrary, declared, that if he had put an end
to the proscription, it was till without tying up his
hands, or prescribing a law to him which might con-
fine his liberty.

Dio, and especially Appian, has left us a great
many observations upon the events of this proscription,
and the adventures of the proscribed, who did not all
perish. A great many saved themselves by different
ways, which necessity, very justly called the mother
of invention, pointed out to them, or their friends,
their neighbours and domefticks. And with regard
to those who could not escape the cruelty of their as-
faflins, spread all over Rome, and in the other towns
and country of Italy, their melancholy fortune was at-
tended with circumstances extremely interesting. In
order to shun prolixity, I all not here transcribe all
the particular fads which are mentioned in authors,
but only such as regard the most illustrious persons,
and those whose names are the moit celebrated in
hilfory. I flall content nmyelf with a general obfer-
vation from Velleius, which does but little honour to
human nature, which is, that commonly speaking,
the proscribed found in their wives, in thole cruel
circumstances, a perfect fidelity, in their freedmen
and slaves, a tolerable one, but none at all in their
Ions; so dangerous a thing is hope for seducing the
human mind, and capable of violating the most sacred
rights, whenever they become hinderances to our
ambition.

Amongf: the vitims of the cruelty of the Triurn- iv,. ap.
viri, Cicero, on a great many accounts, was the firt. en.

Id notandum eft, suisse in profcriptos uxorem fidem fumnmam, 1;-
bcrtolum mediam, Ifrvorum aliquam, filiorum nuliam. Adeo dilfi-
tiiis ell hominibus tcurnque concepta: fpei mora. VLL. II. 67.

K k 3 lie

AR. 7°9 He had been proscribed together with his son, his
A,. C. brother, his nephew, all those who belonged to him,
Suafcr.vI. and who had any conne&ion with him either by friend-
·'e u. hip or parentage. He could not promise himself a
66. Piut. cic. better fate, and he * knew very well, that he could
Appian. no more hope for favour from Anthony, than Brutus
t';1 and Cassius could expec it from young Coefar. For

this reason he left Rome at the approach of the Tri-
umviri, and his first design was to cross the ea with
his brother, to go to Macedonia, to Brutus's camp.
They travelled together ome time, mutually con-
doling their bad fortune. But as their departure had
been very precipitate, and they wanted a great many
things, Quintus turned back to make more ample
provision, and Cicero continued his route towards
Gaeta, where having heard no news of his brother he
embarked. Sometimes t the contrary winds, and
sometimes the fatigues of the sea, which his body,
quite spent with anxiety, could not support, obliged
him to disembark. At last he found himself quite
tired of flying and of life itfeif, and resolved to go to
a country-houfe which he had about a mile from the
sea. " I must, fays he, die in my country, which I
have saved more than once."

Superftiion, according to Plutarch, had a hand
in this resolution of Cicero's; for a flock of crows
alighted upon the yard of the vessel in which Cicero
was, and began to peck at the ends of the ropes,
which Cicero taking for a bad omen, desired them to
put him on shore. The crows still followed him,
and while he was in one of the chambers of his coun-
try-houfe lying on a couch, they flocked anew about
the window, and one of them even went up to his

' M Cicero fib adventum Triumvirorum cefferat urbe, pro certo
habens, id quod erat, non magis Antonio eripi e, quam Czfari Bru-
turn & Caffium posse. Lv.
t Aliquoties in altum provetum quum modb venti adverfi retulif-
sent. mlodb ipfe jaaationem navis cco volvente flu&u pati non pof.
iet. tadi:rm tandem eum & fuge & vitae caepit: regreflufque ad fupe-
riorem v;:._m, quae paulo plus mille pafilbus marl abeft, " Moriar,"
nquit, " in patria tpe fervau."

couch,

`1;^ s lCR0

^su//^.s^^/Jsun,*^jl^< -y^^5J?»*/"

couch, and with his beak pulled the cap from Cicero's A.R. 709.
head. The generality of mankind are greatly ad- Alt.c
di&ed to the marvellous, and especially with relation
to the tragical deaths of great men. These trifling
circumstances, which doubtless have a great mixture
of the fabulous, very little deserve to be related by so
judicious a writer as Plutarch. I am sorry too that he
should have attributed that foolih thought to Cicero
of going to Rome, stealing privately into the house
of Otavius, and killing himself before the household
Gods of that ungrateful man, in order to bring down
upon him the wrath and vengeance of heaven. But
the fear of the torment, fay they, to which he thereby
must expose himself, hindered him from doing it. As
for my part, all this seems to me to be adjusted to the
Theatre, and I confine myself to the more simple ac-
count of Titus Livius.

It appears, that Cicero's servants pulled him out in
a manner by force from his house, to endeavour to
conceal him. But they had not time; for when they
were upon the road, those who searched for him to
kill him overtook them. Some report that they were
directed by a freedman of Q. Cicero, named Philolo-
gus, who had been inftruted by the very person
whom he betrayed. But the faa is not at all certain.
The murderers had at their head a military tribune
named Popilius, who had formerly been defended
by Cicero in a doubtful cause; and in recompence
of this service, earnestly demande4 a commifliQn to
kill his benefacor. Cicero's saves * were willing to
defend their master, but he ordered them to stop the
litter, and to let him susser quietly what his cruel fate
* Satis conftat servos fortiter fideliterque paratos fiifif ad dimi-
candum : ipfum deponi leticam, & quictos pati quod fora.iniqua co-
geret, juffile. Pronimenti ex leaica, prabentique immotam cervi-
celn, caput przcifum eft. Nec satis ftolidae crude)itati militum suit.
Manus quoque, fcripfiffe aliquid in Antonium exprobrantes, preci-
derunt. Ita relatum caput ad Antoniaq, jfuqpeejus inter dua
manus in Roftris pofitum, ubi ille Consul, uoi fpe Confularis, ubi eo
ipio anno adversus Antonium, quanta nulla unquam humana vox cum
admiratione eloquentie, auditu* fuerat. Vix attollentes prae lacrymis
Oculos homines itueri twcidat memrbra ejus poterant.

K k 4 ren

A.R. 79. rendered inevitable. In the mean time, fixing his
Ant. C. eyes upon the assassins, he thrust his head out at the

door cf the litter, and the Centurion Herennius im-
meliatevl wounded him, while the soldiers thetn-
selves, touched at the misfortunes and firmness of a
man o worthy of respect, turned down Their eyes
and covered their faces. This was not enough to fa-
tisfy the brutal barbarity of the Centurion, for he cut
his hands again, even reproaching him before his
death of having wrote against Anthony. Plutarch as-
fures us, that in this he executed the orders of that
cruel Triumvir.

Popilius carried the head and hands of Cicero to
Anthony, who was not at all afraid to feat his eyes
upon o horrid a fpetacle; and after having examined
attentively, and even with great bursts of laughter,
the frightful and lamentable remains, ordered them
to be placed on the Orator's tribunal, faying, that,
as to him, the proscription was now finiihed. The
head of Cicero was then exposcd between his two
hands on the fame place, where so many times, both
during his Consulship and afterwards, and in fine,
the last year of his life, in his speech against Anthony,
he had displayed an eloquence, which no man ever
equalled, or, at least, surpassed. All the fpetators
were affcted, and durst not raise their eyes bathed in
tears to those objects, the fight of which pierced them
excellively with grief. Anthony * by this intended to
insult the memory of him whom he hated, and he
did not fee that he dishonoured himself by this shame-
ful revenge, which proved his insolence in prosperity,
and the unworthy abuse which he made of his power.
They assure us that he had the baseness to crown with
his own hand Popilius the chief of the murderers, and
that he suffered that wretch to place upon the Ora-
tor's tribunal his own picure adorned with a crown,
at the fide of the deplorable remains of him whom he
had killed.
* >-ant: i£ t
. n pi ui, i dusi tiCf7a n thF,
i tga 1SFitr r"
lE;r'l f=JiU:.ti: . Pi.7. Anjln.

Ful.

Fulvia, formerly married tb Clodius, but now the A. R.709
wife of Anthony, and besides personally offended at 4
Cicero, who had mote than once expressed herself
fatyrically against hiim, vented against his- head that
parfion and rage with which ihe would have tormented
him while alive, if he had had it in her power.
Before it was fixt upon the tribunal, she placed it be-
fore her, loaded it with reproaches, spit upon it, and,
having put it on her knee, he opened the mouth, and
pulled out the tongue, which the pierced with her
bodkin; an aion worthy fich a fury as this woman
had always been, and continued to be to the end of
her life.

Posterity has very well revenged Cicero upon An-
thony's outrages. No death could ever be more bit-
terly deplored, than that of him who had done so
much honour to letters. Poets, orators, and hifto-
rians have all signalized their grief for the melancholy
end of Cicero; and by a very natural consequence
have expressed an extreme indignation against his
murderer. V'e find in a colletion of Seneca the Sen.
father, a great many fragments of orators and antient Suafor.VL
historians who have exercised their talents upon this
subjed. Velleius, as great a flatterer as he was, al-
lows himself here to be transported with zeal so far
as to interrupt the thread of his narration, and leave
the stile of an historian to inveigh against Anthony's
crveltv. Pliny the elder expresses himself verypimn, VI.
strongly upon it in a few words, affirming that Cicero 30.
was not proscribed by Anthony, but on the contrary,
that Anthony proscribed himself, by covering himself
with infamny in the eyes of all posterity. Martial * de-
clarcs that Anthony appeared to him more criminal by
the death of Cicero alone, than by all the carnage of
the reft who were proscribed; and that there was no
more room to reproach the wretched Pothinus, mur-
derer of the great Pompey.

* Antoni, Phario nihil objeEture Pothino,

Et levius tabula, quamr Cicerone, nocens,

MARTIAL, V. 69.
7 Octavius

A. R. 709. O&avius is spared in all thee reproaches; not be-
Ant. C cause he did not deserve a ihare of them; but because

' of his becoming emperor, and their being afraid, even

under his successors, to flew any want of refpe to
his memory. And besides that he had never aed
direcly against Cicero, and had himself opposed,
though weakly, the design of the proscription, he
rendered him justice afterwards to a certain degree;
Plut.Cic. and Plutarch has preserved to us a memorable passage

on this fubjeEt. He tells us that several years after-
wards, when Otavius governed the empire under the
title of Augustus, he entered hastily the chamber of
one of his grandsons, who happened to have a book
of Cicero in his hand. The young prince alarmed,
concealed the book under his robe. Auguitus took
it from him, and read a good deal of it. After which
he returned it saving, " he was a man of genius, my
son, and a lover of his country."
Aua. de Cicero was murthered the seventh of December, in
Cans. the last month of the fixty-fourth year of his age.
cr. 1loq. So that according to t Titus Livius, whose pencil I

shall here borrow to trace in miniature the portrait of
so famous a man, his death could not have appeared
altogether premature, provided it had been natural.
His fublimc talent has displayed itself in immortal
performances, and been recompenfed with the greatest
honours. Fortune was for a long time favourable to
him; but during a course of prosperity, having sus-
sered several cruel disgraces, banishment, the fall of
the party to which he was attached, the loss of his
daughter, and at last a tragical and cruel end, of all
his adversities he supported none with that firmness

+ Vixit tres & fexarinta annos, ut, si vis abfuiffet, ne immatura
quidem mors videri poflit. Ingenium & operibus; & premiis operum,
felix. Ipfe fortae diu profperae: & in longo tenore felicitatis, mag-
nis interim ictus vulneribus, exfilio, ruini partium pro quibus ftete-
rat, filiae morte, exitu tan trifti a:que acerho, onium adverforum
nihil ut viro dignum erat tulit, prater mortem: quae vere eimanti
mnihs indigna videri potuit, quod a vitore inimico nil crudelius pas-
lus erat, quam quod ejufdem fortune compos ipfe feciffet. Si quis
tamen virtutibus vitia penfarit, vir magnus, acer, memorabilia suit,
i in cuius laudes Cicerone laudatore opus fuerit.

which

which becomes a man of courage, excepting only his A.R. 709.
death. And even his death, to judge equitably of it, At.c'
may appear less undeserved, and atrocious, because
he only suffered from his enemy what he would have
made him susser, had he had the opportunity and
power in his hands. After all, let us compensate his
faults with his virtues, and we ihall find that he was
a great man, full of fire and elevation of spirit, for
ever to be remembered, and not to be sufficiently
praised unless by another Cicero.

Thus Titus Livius expresses himself, who, like a
great * man, praises without reserve the merit and ta-
lents of others. Pollio, though partial enough else-
where to Cicero, makes use of almost the fame lan-
guage. Only t to that weakness of mind in difaflers
with which that great genius has been reproached by
all those who have mentioned him, he adds a want of
moderation in prosperity. Cicero, in whatever fitua-
tion he was, whether happy or miserable, never thought
that it could change; very different from that well
prepared heart mentioned by Horace $ which hopes
in adversity, and in prosperity fears the return of bad
fortune.

Brutus, who was always a little rigid in his senti- Plut.Brut.
ments, judged very severely of the death of Cicero.
He said he was more ashamed of the cause of it, than
affli&ed at the loss. This expreltion has no need of
a commentary, after those fragments of his letters
which I have quoted, in which he censures Cicero's
complaisance to Oavius with so much eagerness.
Nevertheless he revenged his death, and to appease
the manes of Cicero and Decimus, who were both his
friends, and one of them his relation, he sent orders
* Candidiilmus omnium magnorun ingeniorum nftiinator T. Li-
vius. SEN. ibid.
t Utinam moderatius fecundas res, & fortius adverfas ferre potn-
iffet Nam utraque quum venerant ei, mutari eas non posse rebatur.
ASIN. POLL. ap. Sen. ibid.

2 Sperat infeftis, metuit fecundis
Alteram fortem bene prxeparatum
Peus, HOR, Od. II. 0,

to

AR. 7C9. to Hortenfius to put to death Caius Antonius his pri.
Ant'.c. soner, and brother of the Triumvir. He had spared

him till that time out of pure generosity, without
hearkening to the repeated instigations of Cicero, who
advised him not to trust him from the beginning.
Caius, during the time he was under the power of Bru-
tus, had made two different attempts to raise a fedi-
tion among the troops of his vanquisher. The cruelty
of his brother appeared to Brutus a decisive reason for
sacrificing him, and I do not observe that he is
blamed for it in history, although those reprisals,
which certainly put no stop to the unjuit violence of
the enemy, seem to me but very little conformable
to humanity.

The son of Cicero, who had been proscribed to-
gether with his father, was now with Brutus, and not
only efcaed the fury of the proscription, butwas
afterwards advanced to the Confulihip by Octavius, as
we fiall fee in its proper place.
Appian. Quintus Cicero and his on had not so happy a
D'IO. fate. The son was taken first, having been betrayed

by his slaves. His behaviour had been the caufi of
frequent vexations to his family; and Cicero's ietters
to Atticus are full of complaints againPt him. Never-
thclefs on this la.t and melancholy occasion, he gave
proofs of a filial tenderness which can never be enough
commended. He concealed his father, and though
delivered to the hands of the executioners, who tor-
mented him in order to mke him discover the secret,
he obstinately kept a generous silence. But the father
who was not far off, and heard all that passed, could
not endure that his son hould be so cruelly treated on
his account, and therefore he discovered himself.
There was a struggle between them who should die
firit; but the executioner fettled that point, by cut-
ting both their throats at the fame time.

The uncle of Anthony was saved by his sifter Julia,
the mot:her of the Triumvir. This lady received her
bro:her into her house, where he continued quiet for
fame time ; becaule the Centurions respected the mo-

t!her

ther of their general. There was one person, how- A.R. 70.
ever, audacious enough to come with the soldiers, At. C.

43.
and attempt to force an entry into the house. Julia
presented herself at the gate, and stretching out her
arms to hinder the affaflins from pafling " You
" Shall not kill Caesar, fays she to them, till you have
, first killed her who gave life to your General."
However well accufomed the soldiers were to insolence,
and all forts of cruelties, they flopped short at her
generous declaration, and durst go no further. Then
Julia, to deliver her brother enri.ely out of danger,
went to the Forum, where Anthony was, fitting on
his tribunal with his two Collegues, and addressing
herself to him: " I come to accuse myself, fays she,
" of concealing L. Cafar. Order me to be killed,
, since death is also denounced againft.thofe who
" succour any of the proscribed." Anthony answer-
ed, that she was a better filter than he had shewn
herself a mother,. since, though he did not hinder
L. Caesar from declaring her son an enemy to the
publick, he nevertheless wanted to rescue him from
a just vengeance. He could not, however, refuse his
mother, and L. Cafar, by her means, enjoyed a per-
set safety.

Paulus had not such great difficulty in obtaining
favour from his brother Lepidus; for without any
noise or buille, a tacit commiflion of the Triumvir,
and the refpet which the soldiers had for the brother
of their General, gave him an opportunity of going
out of Italy. He went to Brutus's camp, and after
the battle of Philippi he retired to Miletus, and there
passed the remainder of his days, without deigning to
accept of that liberty which was granted him to re-
turn to Rome.

There are still remaining three of the number of
the proscribed, whose fate I ought to give. an account
of. The father-in-law of Pollio, having been happy
enough to gain the ea and to embark, was overtaken
by a storm. He was seized with a very strange kind
of despair, if we may believe Appian; and in order

that

A. R 709- that he might not periih by shipwreck, he threw him-
Ant. c. self into the sea. 1 find in the fame author, amongst

those whose ungrateful sons demanded and urged their
death, one C. Toranius, an antient Prator, who ap-
xiii '3. pears to be the tutor of Oftavius, whom 1 have
Val. ax. mentioned. He was killed by the soldiers. The
's8. death of Plotius, the brother of Plancus, was

singular in this respect, that he was discovered
by the odour of the perfumes which he used even
in his retreat. However, he was not found at once;
and his laves, from a very commendable fideli-
ty, chose rather to susser the torture than disco-
ver their master. Plotius, however, delivered them
by discovering himself, and was killed.

Amidst this great number of innocent persons who
deserved a better fate, one can hardly much lament a
famous criminal, whose injustice and violence render
him unworthy of all pity. This is Verres, who was
accuscd several years before by Cicero, and reduced
to banish himself; but afterwards returned to Rome,
no doubt by virtue of that law of Cafar which recalled
all exiles. The fame mad passion which he had for
those curious trifles, which had made him commitfo
Plin. many crimes, was also the cause of his death. He
xxi. :. had three beautiful vases of Corinthian brass, which

An:honv passionately longed for; and upon Verres's
reiuling to give them to the Triumvir, he was pro-
fcribed.
Appn. \Wiih such a number of so many melancholy ob-

jects, let us mingle ome which are more chearful,
and amongst so many crimes, give place to ome in-
stances of virtue. There is none appears to me more
wcrthv of record than that of a son, who renewed the
example of the piety of Eneas with the like success.
His fAther Appius, aged and infirm, feeing himself
proscribed, did not think that what remained of a
languihing life was worth the pains of preserving,
and was willing to wait for the murtherers quietly at
his own house. He could not, however, refilt the
pressing instances and zeal of his son, who took him

on

on his shoulders, and, loaded with this precious bur-A.R.7709.
then, went all over the city, unknown to some, and Ant. C.
commanding the refpe& of others by the beauty of
so commendable and generous an ation. As soon as
they got out of Rome, the son, sometimes aifting
his father to walk, and Sometimes carrying him, when
the fatigue was too great, conduted him to the sea,
where he made him embark for Sicily. This admir-
able instance of filial piety hone forth in full lustre at
a time, when, as I have said, according to Velleius,
all was full of examples of unnatural sons. The peo-
ple preserved the remembrance of it, and some time
afterwards, whenRome was quieted, they made young
Oppius an edile. But the goods of his father having
been confiscated, the edile had not wherewithal to
defray the expence of the games belonging to that
office; on which account the workmen charged no-
thing for their labour, and the fpetators, taxing
themselves willingly each according to his ability,
threw upon the * Theatre a large quantity of silver,
to make good, with regard to Oppius, the injustice
of fortune.

F. Calenus, who had always been attached, as rtay
easily be observed, to Cafar and Anthony, aed as
a faithful friend with regard to the learned Varro.
The merit of this extraordinary man, who had dif-
tinguifhed himself in arms as well as in letters, could
not fail of rendering him odious to, and suspected by
the Triumviri. Besides, he had been a friend and
partizan of Pompey; and in hort Anthony, during
Cefar's life-time, had taken from him part of his
property. The friends of Varro disputed the honour
of supporting him in his disgrace, and Calenus ob-
tained the preference. He carried him to a country-
house, where Anthony frequently came, without sus-
peaing in the least that a proscribed person of that
importance lodged under the fame roof with him.
* The Orcheflrea is the part of the Roman theatre where the Se-
nators and Vestals at.

Thus

A.R. 709 Thus Varro passed all the time of danger safety;
A- C. after which he appeared again, having suffered no
A. G-l. other damage from the proscription, than the pillaging

-' of his library. He lived a long while after, and con-

tinued his learned labours as long as he lived, that
is, to the age of a hundred years.
Corn. Ne- Atticus, an intimate friend of Cicero and Brutus,
o n At- but who nevertheless had done ery essential feryices

to the family of Anthony in his-misfortunes, received
then the reward of so moderate a conduct. He imagin-
ed he was threatened, and not without foundation,
for he was really proscribed. He therefore wifely re-
solved to conceal himself, and his refuge was the
house of P. Volumnius, who owed him very great and
recent obligations. He hut himself up there with Q:
Gellius Canus, who had been his friend from his
infancy, and resembled him perfectly in the gentle-
ness of his manners. Volumnius was carefled by An-
thony, and the companion of his pleasures. How-
ever, he had no occasion to make use of his credit
with him in favour of Atticus. This Triumvir, who
was doubtless very cruel, but rather through pafflon
and fury than from his natural disposition, which
was capable of generosity, remembered how much he
owed to Atticus, and being informed of the place
where he concealed himself, he wrote to him with
his own hand, assuring him that he had nothing to
fear, neither for himself nor for Gellius Canus for
that by his orders they were both raied out of the
lift of the proscribed. This was a double joy to At-
ticus to save his companion, whose friendhip, which
commenced when they were at school, constantly in-
creased till they were both become old.

C. Nepos commends greatly on this occasion the
prudence of Atticus; and though the life which he
has composed of this illuflrious Roman knight, is not
void of panegyrick, I own that I subscribe more wil-
* In codem lee&r & s;iritus eus, & egregiorum operum curfiu
exftincus eft. V. M;,.x. \s.i. ;.

lingly

lingly to: his elogiums, than to the-invidios bferva-- a.709.
tions of the Abbe de S Ra. al Why should noc ot Anel .
adopt, for example, this refle&ion 'of C. Nepi?,,
( If, * fays he, we boast of the kill of a piot who,
is capable of saving his vessel in :aftorm, and from.,
the helves which lie scattered under the waves, why..
should not we commend the prudence of a citizen,
who, amidst so many storms in the Repubiick, could'
save himself from shipwreck ?" This prudence is so
much the-more commendable in Atticus, as it was -
always attended with good nature, generosity, and a
determined inclination to do good to all. - Thus hav-
ing escaped .himself from the danger of the profcrip-
tion, he was the resource of a great number of the
proscribed. He had lands 'and ample pofleflions in
Epirus; and whoever- among the proscribed retired
there, found every thing he could wish for as long as
he pleased to stay there.

I cannot finish this account of the proscribed better
than with Meffalla, who was then young, but pro-
mifed all that could be expected from a generous
mind, and a superior genius. We have a large com-
mendation of him in a letter from Cicero to Brutus';
and I hall transcribe it here so much the' more wil-
lingly, as I hall have occasion to speak afterwards
more than once of him who is the fubje& of it. He
had left Cicero to go and join Brutus, by whom he
was extremely beloved and esteemed. Cicero fays
theli to Brutus, " You t know him, and consequently

Quod si gubernator pracipua laude fertur, qui navem ex hieme
marique fccpulofo fervat; cur lon fingularis ejus exiftimetur pru-
dentia, qui ex tot tamque gravibus procellis civilibus ad incolumita-
tem pervenir ?
t Cave exiflimes, Brute, (quanquam non eft neceffe ea mead te quae
tibi nota funt fcribere: fed tamen tantam omnium laudum excellen-
tiam non queo filentio praterire) cave putes, probitate, conftantia,
cura, studio Reipublica: quidquam illi simile effe: ut eloquentia, qui
mirabiliter excellit, vix in eo locum ad laudandum habere videatur.
Qanqquam ir hac ipfa fapientia plus apparet: ita gravi judicio mul-
tique arte fe exercuit in veritTimo genere dicendi. Tanta autem in-
duftria et, tantumque evigilatin ltudio, ut non maxima ingenio, qucd
in eo fummum eft, gratia habenda videatur. Cic. ad Brut. i. 15.
VOL. IX. L1 it

A R 709. it is needless to give you a charater of him; but it is
AP c-. impofible for me to pass over in silence such accom-

plifbed merit. You must not think to find any equal
to Meffalla with regard to probity, uniformity of
principles and condu&, and a warm and firm attach-
ment to the Republick; that eloquence, in which he
greatly excels, can scarce find a place among futh A
multitude of extraordinary talents which he possess.
Even in his eloquence, wisdom fhints forth and pre-
dominates; so much does solidity of judgment, and
the most extensive capacity guide him in his studies,
and direct him to the purest and molt refined tate.
He has naturally a sublime turn of mind; but there
is joined with it an activity and affduity which seem
to dispute with it the glory of his fucceifes." It was
this young man so worthy of personal esteem, and
besides honourable by his high birth, whom the Tri-
umviri proscribed, under a false pretence that he was
an accomplice in Cefar's murder. But Meffalli had
nothing to fear from their cruel injustice, because he
was in the army of Brutus. It was either upon this
A- account, or shame, or the hopes of gaining him over

to their party, that the Triumviri published a pro-
clamation to the following effect: " As the relations
of Meffalla have certified to us, that he as not in
Rome at the time that Cefar was killed, we erae his
name out of the lift of the proscribed." Meffallatook
no more notice of their pardon than he had done of
their anger; and he remained to the end faithful to
Brutus, for whom he had a respect and tenderness
which nothing could efface.
p';n. vi. : must beg leave to stop here, and refer to Appian
43. such of my readers who desire to know all the adven-

tures of the proscribed. I hall only remark briefly
fame singular instances worthy to be remembered;
and I ihail mention one Fiduftius, who was formerly
proscribed by Sylla, and escaped death at that time,
but unfortunately suffered under the Triumviri, hav-
ing been anew proscribed by them at the end of thirty
years, only because he had been proscribed once be-

foret

fore; oe Nonius, who was profcribK En cpurjt of A. R.. 70
an opal which he had of the bagnecs of a filbert; hich 3.
i '
he kept at the peril of his life an, d of ah that heptr -
Pla'.
effed: in fine, a young child, named Atiliu, w xxxv1. .'
riches having .excted the av,arce of the Triuriri, D,
they made him put on the toga virils, so tha he
might be reputed a man, and they prpofiribeiqa
as such.

Thus avarice /pd cruelty united together to tor-
ment the rnfopratmiate Romans; so that those mightb
reckoned happy who were permitted to ransom' thei
lives by immehfe furs, which they gave to Anthony
and his wife. For Fulyia made a onfderable' !gure
in this proscription ; and it is reported that the he1 a Va Max,
of one of the sufferers having been brought 9'An- ix. s.
thony, he said,'" I am notiacqainted with that head; Appin.
" but very likely it is an affair of my wife's." Which
was really the cafe, for he was pug into the fatal li
by'the orders of Fulvia, to whom he had refued tp
fell his house.. And that no body might doubt of the
cause of his suffering, his head, instead of being car-
ried to the Forum, like those of the others who were
proscribed, was exposed on the very house which he
would not part with.

It was chiefly upon Anthopy that the odium of so Plut; Ant.
many cruel indignities fell, so much the more as he
surpassed Otavius in age, and Lepidus in power and
besides, he seemed to pique himself upon insulting
the publick miseries, by those excesses which he plung-
ed himself into at that very time. His house, which
was frequently hut to magistrates and military oi-
cers, who were rejeted with ignominy, was filled with
buffoons and players, and wretched flatterers, given
up to the most flameful gluttony; and he Squandered
away, amongst the worst of :ankind, that money
which was the price of the bloed of the most illustrious
citizens.

Lepidus and Plancus were. illing to lhare with him
the publick hatred by the triumph which they caused
to be decreed to them in this conjuncture, for frivo-

L1 2 lous

A.R.79. lous exploits which they pretended to have done in

4t. Gaul. They had the barbarous insolence, amidst so

many fubjets of mourning and tears, and while the
ftreeis bs Romne were streaming with blood, to issue
a proclamation for publick rejoicings at their tri-
Pigh. An. umphs. They were Consuls elet, and triumphed the
.l' last days of the year, Plancus the twenty-ninth, and

Lepidus the thirty-firft of December, both of them
heartily cursed by the citizens. The soldiers too were
of the fame mind, and in following the chariot of the
triumphers they sung this verse, which has been pre-
Veil, 1.67. served to us by Velleius: De Germanis, nn de Galis,

duo triumpbant Cnfles. " It is not over the Gauls
which the Consuls triumph, but over their brothers
whom they have proscribed." The Spirit of this
Latin verse cannot be well translated into another
language, because the word Germani is the Latin name
for the people of Germany, and in that language also
signifies brothers.

The cruelties of triumviral Proscription were con-
fined within the bounds of Italy. All those who could
escape from that unfortunate country found protecors
to relieve them. Brutus and CaTffus, the one in Ma-
cedonia, the other in Asia, and Cornificius in Africa,
saved a great number of them; but there was none
more serviceable to them than Sextus Pompeius.
, _:n. ' This only heir of so great and unfortunate a family,
D:. after having been condenned, as I laid before, amongt

the authors of C far's death, though they could not
even impute so much as a ufpicion to him, was never-
thelels put into the lift of the proscribed. He had re-

cr!e to his sword to be revenged of these unjust and
- Fcc.eedincs; nd making use of the title of
:,:anrer-general of the eas, which had been given
. .a time when the Senate had folme influence in
Rcli bflick, he assembled together as many vessels
i. could, and received, without diftintion, all
.c who were disposed to serve him. Pyrates, naves,
bbers, and all were welcome to him. But besides
tLhci, there were men of a different stamp, inhabitants

· ox

of the towns of Italy, who were to be facrificedas a A.R.?79.
recompence to the Legions of the Triumviri,' -wl i tC
flocked together to range themselves under him, w.honm
they looked upon as their revenger, and augnented
his forces. He soon found himself powerful enough
not only to keep possession of the sea of Tulcany, to
pillage, make incursions, and take vefcls in the ports
of Italy, but also to make himself master of a part of
Sicily, forcing Pompeius Bithynicus, who was then
Praetor of it, to let him'fhare in the command.

All this was done during the course of the Profcrip-
tion, and put him in a condition to afford the most fa-
vourable refuge for the proscribed, to which he ap-
plied himself with great zeal and generosity. He
caused to be fixed up in Rome, and in all the great
towns of Italy, placarts, by which he promised, to
those who should lave one of the proscribed, double
the fum which the Triumviri gave for each head which
was brought them. He flationed boats, barks, and
ships of war along the coast, to give notice by signals
to the unfortunate persons who hid themselves, and
to receive all those who could get on board. When-
ever any of the proscribed got to him, he received
them graciously, furnilhed them with cloaths and all
other necessaries, and to such as were capable, gave
commissions in his legions, or on board the fleet. He
kept his faith with them to the last, and never made
any treaty with the Triumviri afterwards, wherein the
f£fety of the proscribed, who chose to return to their
country, was not tipulated.

I have already observed, that the avarice of the
Triumviri equalled their cruelty, and was even fre-
quently the principal motive of it. The immense
fums which were produced from the confiscation of the
goods of the proscribed, was not sufficient for them;
whether it was owing to their being as ill managed as
they were acquired; or whether it was, that the ava-
rice of the soldiers was a vast gulf which nothing could
fill up. As the troops were sensible that they were
necessary to their generals, who stood indilpenfibly in

L1 3 need

A. R. 70 need of the force of arms, to keep poflefion of a
Ant C. power wholly founded on violence, and detested by

all the citizens; neither officers nor soldiers kept
within any bounds, but gave a loose to their desires
and extravagant demands. They not only adjudged
to themselves the greatest part of the spoils of the pro-
fcribed, but they plundered their houses, and render-
ed themselves by force the heirs of those who died a
natural death. In hort, their insolence was carried
so far, that Atia, the mother of Ocavius, dying at
that time, there was one of the soldiers who had the
boldness to demand that he might succeed as her son.
The Triumviri then were far from receiving as much
as they expeced from the sale of the goods of the
proscribed and after this was over, they gave notice
to the people, that they must still have eight hundred
millions of lefterces to defray the expence of the war
which they were going to undertake (fix millions two
hundred and fixty-fix thousand four pounds sterling.)

In order to raise this fum, there was no extortion
nor rapine which they did not put in practice. Taxes
upon the rich, double duties of all kinds, taking away
from the vestals treasures intrusted to their care, op-
preflions and chicanery used against the possessors of
lands and houses, all was put in practice. Thus they
amafed considerable ums, part of which they were
obliged to give a Ihare of to those whose aiftance was
absolutely necessary; so that there was an universal
change made at that time in the fortunes of the Re-
publick, and pofieions passed from the hands of the
rich to those who but a little before had no other fund
or --venue but their swords.

One of the nmo singular expedients made use of
by the Triumviri, in order to raise money, was a tax
bn the women. I mention it here because I chufe to
join together every thing which regards the violence
of the Triumviri, though probably enough this wag
not done till the year after. They made out a lift theft
of fourteen hundred ladies of the best quality, and
the richest in the city, whom they ordered to make

8 decla-

declaration of their estates, that they might be taxed A. 79.
with such urns as hould be thought proper; and Ant c.
this under the penalty ofconfifcation to all who hould 4
refute or make fraudulent reports; and in order to dif-
cover the fraud, if any- should be guilty of it, they
promised a reward to such as hould detec them.

The ladies were not wanting to themselves on this
occasion. They had recourse to the protecion of Oc-
tavia the filter of young Cfar, and to Julia the
mother of Anthony, of whom they received very
obliging promises. But Fulvia, that haughty and ar-
rogant woTman, having rejeted all their petitions with
disdain, they were piqued at the affront, and went to
the Forum to address the Triumviri themselves. A
refpeEt for their birth and rank having engaged the
mob, and even the guards to separate and make room
for them, they approached the tribunal, and Horten-
fia, the daughter of the Orator Hortenfius, spoke in
the name of all the ret. This lady's speech is to be
found in Appian, and it appears to me to be too well
composed to fufpet it as having been done by that
author. I all therefore transcribe it as an original,
and copied after the memoirs of the times.

1' We followed at first, said Hortenfia, the laws of
" modesty which become us, in beginning by addref-

sing ourselves to persons of our own sex, in order-
" to obtain justice by their means. But having been
' treated by Fulvia with an indecent haughtiness, we
" find ourselves obliged to present our complaints im-
"mediately to you.

" You have taken from us our fathers, our children,
" our husbands, and brothers; and if you take from
"us our goods, you reduce us to a situation which is
"neither suitable to our birth, our manner of living,
" nor to our sex. If you alledge that you have sus-
" sered an injury from ofr hands, proscribe us as you
" have done the men. But if even our weakness jus-
"tifies us to you, if we have neither declared any of
" you enemies to the publick, nor corrupted the fide-
" lity ofthe soldiers, nor-fent armies against you, nr

"laid

A-R. 7o. laid any difficulties in your way to those honours
Ant. C. " and offices which you have been ambitious of.pof-

45.

lessing, why should we have any fiare in the punil-
" ment, when we had no part in the offence ? And

why hould we be loaded with taxes, who neither
· difputc with you the power, nor command of le-
· gions, nor any part of publick authority, to invade
- which you carry things to so great excess ?

" But you tell us that you have a war to support.
" And pray when has mankind been free from war?

And yet has any of them thought of imposing a tax
' on the women upon that account ? The universal
' content of nations has confirmed this exception,
- which nature herself has granted us. Our ancestors,
" it is true, in the extreme exigency the Republick

was in, when attacked by Hannibal, contributed
· towards the expences of the ffate but they did it
· voluntarily. That which they gave was not levied
· upon their estates, their dowries, and houses, re-

sources without which free women cannot live.
They only appropriated to it the ornaments of their
" persons. Nay further, they were neither fubje&
" to any estimation, nor informations of accusers.

There was neither force nor constraint, and they
" determined freely, as well upon the quantity of the
" contribution, as upon the thing itself. What is
" then the danger which you apprehend at present,
·; with regard to the country and the empire ? In cafe
· there was a war with the Gauls or Parthians, you
" hould find us ready to renew the example of our
- ancestors. But as to civil wars, the Gods forbid
" that we fnould help you with our contributions, or
"facilitate the means of destroying one another. We
"were charged with no taxes in the war between
"Cafar and Pompey; neither Cinna, nor Marius,
' nor even Sylla himself, that tyrant of the Repub-
, lick, which you pretend to reform, ever attempted
' to commit such a violence."
This speech was too free and judicious not to dif-
please the Triumviri. They were offended at the

bold-

nets of the weaker sex, while those men- who were .A .% ir
oppreleddurft neither raise their heads, nor open their
mouths. They therefore wanted to cause the li&ors
to puih back the ladies. But the whole crowd which
filled the place, signifying by a shout that they difap-
proved of 'his' violence, they put on a gentler tone,
and proinifed to confider the affair again. Their mo-
deration, however, did not go so far as to retrat the
injustice fully; it was a great deal for them to retrench
the number, and tax only four hundred ladies instead
of fourteen hundred.

I have said, according to Appian, that it had been AuL GeL
regulated in the island of the Reno, that Otaviusxv
should yield the.Confulhip to Ventidius. He was a
man worthy of the greatest honours, if the thing had
been done in a more regular manner. His fortune was
indeed very furprizing. I have mentioned elsewhere, o
that he-had been led in triumph, when he was almoftxx.
a child, in the Social War, by Pompeius Strabo. It
is doubtless that great mortification which has given
occasion to ome to fay, that he was of. low birth;
though probably he was the son of one of the chiefs of
the allies which revolted against Rome. Being re-
duced to great misery, he served at first as a private
soldier, and distinguished himself in the loweit rank
of the army. With a view of pushing his fortun?, he
undertook to furnish mules to carry the equipages of
the camp, and he set out to follow the low business
with Cxfar's army in Gaul. That great man, who
had uncommon judgment and penetration in diftin-
guifhing merit, picked out Ventidius in that obscure
Itation. He employed him in his army, and having
been pleased with his service, when he became matter
of the Republick, he made him a Senator, then Tri-
bune of the People, and at last designed him for Pra-
tor for that year; the events of which I am now writ-
ing. Ventidius in his praetorfhip shewed himnfelf, as
we have seen, attached to Anthony, and served him
with fidelity and courage. In recompence he was first
honoured with the dignity of Pontiff, and very oon

after,

A.. 709after, by the most ipgular ditin&ion, an coptrary
~{'C to all rules, he was advanced to the rak of Consul,

while he was actually invested with the charge of
Prxtor. His promotion to the Confulbhip, compared
with his former condition, occasioned agreat deal of
murmurings; and we find in Aulus G iqs.i, vrfcs
upon this fubje& scattered among thepublik, "C~
* hither, fays the poet, all you who are skilled in he
art of explaining prodigies. A very etraordinary
one has just now happened. He who fdrfid mujec
is become a Consul.". This man, the 9plja of tl
derision of low jefters,is nevertheless the only RoliPn,
as we hall afterwards have occation to relat¢, who,
till the time that Plutarch wrote, had triumphed ov
the Parthians. He only enjoyed the Confuip dur-
ing a part of the month of December, together with
C. Corinnas, formerly one of Cgar's lieutenants in
Spain, who was deputed in the room of Q Pedius.
ppan. The Triumviri followed Crfar's maxims ip ul,
Dio. tiplying the nominations of offices, inorder xo Bwward

a greater number of subje&s. Thus the Praeterip
of Ventidius, as fooo as be became Consul, was
to one of the A;diles; and all the Prietors were ob.
liged to lay down their offices five days before the end
of the year, in order that others might be put in their
places for this hort time, and thereby enjoy both the
title and rank of the antient Prators.

The tyrannical government of the Triumviri was
the objec& of the publick hatred. But they who de-
tested it in private, adorned it in the Senate by ho-
nourary decrees, which fear alone extorted from them.
They yielded to them all the honours formerly be-
Rowed on the benefactors and saviours of the State;
and particularly decreed them Civic crowns, which
after all the blood they had hed in Rome and Italy,
became only the monuments and reproaches of their
cruelty.

Concurrite omnes augures, harufpices:
Portenmnn inufitatum conflatum eft recens,
Nam mulos qui iwcgbat, Coal fahu cft.

M. jEMI.

M. JEMILIUS LEPIDUS, II. AR.I
L, MUNATIii PLANCUS.
Lepidut, with the content of his collegues, had
assumed the place of Coniul, which D. Brutus, named
by CEfar, had left vacant by his death. Piancus too
enjoyed the benefit of Ccfar's nomination. They both
therefore took porlffion cf the Consulship the first of
January. ut there was no equality between the two
Consuls, for.the triumviral power gave Lepidus a
superiority, which reduced Plancus to a dependence,
that left him only the hadow of a Confulihip; and all
the Consuls which followed, found themselves almost
in the fame cafe with Plancus. The last citizens who
enjoyed, properly speaking, the Consular authority,
were those of the preceding year,- Hirtius and Panfa.

The Triumviri were greatly interested to render
refpe&able the memory of Cfar, whose partizans
and avengers they declared themselves to be, and to
whose place each of them aspired. From this motive
they renewed and confirmed all the honours which
had been decreed to him, and betides added some
new ones which I shall not trouble the reader with the
disagreeable detail of. I shall only observe, that they
introduced that year a custom which ever after con-
tinued. For, the first of Jahuary, they swore to ob-
serve the as of Caesar, and made others do the like.
According to this example every year on the fame
day, as long as the form of government established by
Augustus subsisted, they renewed this oath in the name
of the reigning Emperor, and of all his predeccffors,
excepting those who had been disgraced by a decree of
the Senate.

All the precautions which Caesar had taken to efta-
blifh his power, served as rules and models for the
Triumviri. Thus in imitation of him they appointed
magistrates for several years; by which means they
made themselves new creatures, and confirmed their
power by eftabliffing for a long time all the branches

of

,7. of authority in the hands of those who were attached
· to them. -

But the chief affair which employed them w8 the
war against Brutus and Caflius, whose forces gave
thein, veryjuftly, great ifquiet. I have alrda e-
lated the first and rapid increase of the party .aoA
two irreconcileable enemies to tyranny. They
ffill fronger, and performed a great many remarca
things during the last months of the preceding -*t
and the first months of that we are now entered ups
for which reason we must now give an accpuia,
them. ..,

. i
END of the tNINTH VOLUME.-

:.,
. _[
END of the NINTH VOLUME. ~~~~~~~~~')

